PMID: 10348751
PMCID: PMC89277
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.43.6.1350
Title: Characterization and nucleotide sequence of a Klebsiella oxytoca cryptic plasmid encoding a CMY-type beta-lactamase: confirmation that the plasmid-mediated cephamycinase originated from the Citrobacter freundii AmpC beta-lactamase.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 1999 Jun
Authors: Wu SW, Dornbusch K, Kronvall G, Norgren M
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Plasmid pTKH11, originally obtained by electroporation of a Klebsiella oxytoca plasmid preparation into Escherichia coli XAC, expressed a high level of an AmpC-like β-lactamase. The enzyme, designated CMY-5, conferred resistance to extended-spectrum β-lactams in E. coli ; nevertheless, the phenotype was cryptic in the K. oxytoca donor. Determination of the complete nucleotide sequence of pTKH11 revealed that the 8,193-bp plasmid encoded seven open reading frames, including that for the CMY-5 β-lactamase ( bla CMY-5 ). The bla CMY-5 product was similar to the plasmidic CMY-2 β-lactamase of K. pneumoniae and the chromosomal AmpC of Citrobacter freundii , with 99.7 and 97.0% identities, respectively; there was a substitution of phenylalanine in CMY-5 for isoleucine 105 in CMY-2. bla CMY-5 was followed by the Blc and SugE genes of C. freundii , and this cluster exhibited a genetic organization identical to that of the ampC region on the chromosome of C. freundii ; these results confirmed that C. freundii AmpC was the evolutionary origin of the plasmidic cephamycinases. In the K. oxytoca host, the copy number of pTKH11 was very low and the plasmid coexisted with plasmid pNBL63. Analysis of the replication regions of the two plasmids revealed 97% sequence similarity in the RNA I transcripts; this result implied that the two plasmids might be incompatible. Incompatibility of the two plasmids might explain the cryptic phenotype of bla CMY-5 in K. oxytoca through an exclusion effect on pTKH11 by resident plasmid pNBL63.
