PMID: 10817695
PMCID: PMC89899
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.44.6.1470-1478.2000
Title: Biochemical-genetic characterization and regulation of expression of an ACC-1-like chromosome-borne cephalosporinase from Hafnia alvei.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2000 Jun
Authors: Girlich D, Naas T, Bellais S, Poirel L, Karim A, Nordmann P
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
A naturally occurring AmpC β-lactamase (cephalosporinase) gene was cloned from the Hafnia alvei 1 clinical isolate and expressed in Escherichia coli . The deduced AmpC β-lactamase (ACC-2) had a pI of 8 and a relative molecular mass of 37 kDa and showed 50 and 47% amino acid identity with the chromosome-encoded AmpCs from Serratia marcescens and Providentia stuartii , respectively. It had 94% amino acid identity with the recently described plasmid-borne cephalosporinase ACC-1 from Klebsiella pneumoniae , suggesting the chromosomal origin of ACC-1. The hydrolysis constants ( k cat and K m ) showed that ACC-2 was a peculiar cephalosporinase, since it significantly hydrolyzed cefpirome. Once its gene was cloned and expressed in E. coli (pDEL-1), ACC-2 conferred resistance to ceftazidime and cefotaxime but also an uncommon reduced susceptibility to cefpirome. A divergently transcribed ampR gene with an overlapping promoter compared with ampC ( bla ACC-2 ) was identified in H. alvei 1, encoding an AmpR protein that shared 64% amino acid identity with the closest AmpR protein from P. stuartii . β-Lactamase induction experiments showed that the ampC gene was repressed in the absence of ampR and was activated when cefoxitin or imipenem was added as an inducer. From H. alvei 1 cultures that expressed an inducible-cephalosporinase phenotype, several ceftazidime- and cefpirome-cross-resistant H. alvei 1 mutants were obtained upon selection on cefpirome- or ceftazidime-containing plates, and H. alvei 1 DER, a ceftazidime-resistant mutant, stably overproduced cephalosporinase. Transformation of H. alvei 1 DER or E. coli JRG582 ( ampDE mutant) harboring ampC and ampR from H. alvei 1 with a recombinant plasmid containing ampD from E. coli resulted in a decrease in the MIC of β-lactam and recovery of an inducible phenotype for H. alvei 1 DER. Thus, AmpR and AmpD proteins may regulate biosynthesis of the H. alvei cephalosporinase similarly to other enterobacterial cephalosporinases.
