PMID: 11699598
PMCID: 
DOI: 10.1099/0022-1317-50-11-996
Title: Susceptibility patterns of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli associated with traveller's diarrhoea: emergence of quinolone resistance.
Journal: Journal of medical microbiology
PubDate: 2001 Nov
Authors: Vila J, Vargas M, Ruiz J, Espasa M, Pujol M, Corachán M, Anta MTJ, Gascón J
Source: Publisher_HTML
License: publisher_free_full_text

## PUBLISHER_HTML
Susceptibility patterns of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli associated with traveller's diarrhoea: emergence of quinolone resistance | Microbiology Society 
Skip to content 

1887 

Discover our portfolio 

Access Microbiology, an open research platform 

International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 

Journal of General Virology 

Journal of Medical Microbiology 

Microbial Genomics 

Microbiology 

Microbiology Horizons 

Microbiology Outlooks 

Our resources 

Information for authors 

Information for reviewers 

Routes to Open Access 

Publishing Fundamentals 

Information for librarians 

About us 

Microbiology Society 

Publishing for the Community 

Events 

Contact us 

Discover our portfolio 

Access Microbiology, an open research platform 

International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 

Journal of General Virology 

Journal of Medical Microbiology 

Microbial Genomics 

Microbiology 

Microbiology Horizons 

Microbiology Outlooks 

JMM Case Reports 

Browse our collections 

Information for authors 

Article types 

Prepare an article 

Submission and peer review 

Post-acceptance and publication 

Open Access costs 

Institutional agreements 

Ethics policies 

Impact and metrics 

Information for reviewers 

Review with us 

Guidleines for reviewers 

Open Access 

Routes to Open Access 

Open Access costs 

Publish and Read 

Institutional Agreements 

Open data 

Publishing Fundamentals 

Publishing Fundamentals resources 

Information for librarians 

Licensing and access options 

Licence agreements 

Manage your subscription 

Publish and Read 

Open Access reporting 

Promotional resources 

About us 

Microbiology Society 

Publishing for the Community 

Why publish? 

Joining our Editorial Boards 

Events 

Contact us 

FAQs 

Toggle navigation Tools 

Journal of Medical Microbiology 

Volume 50, Issue 11 

Other 

Susceptibility patterns of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli associated with traveller's diarrhoea: emergence of quinolone resistance 

JORDI VILA 1 , MARTHA VARGAS 1 , JOAQUIM RUIZ 1 , MATEU ESPASA 1 , MARC PUJOL 1 , MANEL CORACHÁN 1 , M. TERESA JIMÉNEZ DE ANTA 1 and JOAQUIM GASCÓN 1 

View Affiliations Hide Affiliations 

1 Institut Clínic d'Infeccions i Immunologia, Institut d'Investigacions Biomédiques August Pí i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Hospital Clínic, University of Barcelona, School of Medicine, Villarroel 170, 08036 Barcelona, Spain 
*Corresponding author: Dr J. Vila (e-mail: [email protected] ). 

Published: 01 November 2001 https://doi.org/10.1099/0022-1317-50-11-996 

info Info 

Article information 

Full-Text 

Figures and Tables 

References 

Cited By (38) 

Supplementary Material 

Metrics 

list Sections 

vpn_key Get Access 

build Tools 

Tools 

Add to my favourites 

Create publication alert 

Create citation alert 

Create correction alert 

Export citation 

BibT E X 

Endnote 

Zotero 

Medlars 

RefWorks 

Mendeley 

Recommend to library 

Reprints & Permissions 

share Share 

Share 

Abstract 

Enteroaggregative Escherichia coli (EAggEC) isolates were identified as a cause of traveller's diarrhoea in 50 (9%) of 517 patients and their antimicrobial susceptibility was determined. Molecular epidemiological characterisation and investigation of the mechanisms of acquisition of quinolone resistance among nalidixic acid-resistant EAggEC strains was performed. Seventeen (34%) of 50 patients needed antimicrobial therapy, because of persistence of symptoms in nine cases and the severity of symptoms in eight cases. Ampicillin and tetracycline resistance was high, whereas chloramphenicol and co-trimoxazole showed moderate activity and amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid, nalidixic acid and ciprofloxacin showed very good activity. Resistance to nalidixic acid was demonstrated in three isolates, two from patients who had travelled to India. In all three strains the resistance was linked to mutations in the gyrA gene alone or in both gyrA and parC genes. Although ciprofloxacin shows excellent in-vitro activity and could be useful in the treatment of traveller's diarrhoea in patients travelling abroad, it may not be useful in patients who have journeyed to India or to Mexico. 

Published Online: 01/11/2001 

© 2001 Society for General Microbiology 

Article metrics loading... 

/content/journal/jmm/10.1099/0022-1317-50-11-996 

2001-11-01 

2026-04-16 

Metrics 

Download as PowerPoint 

Full text loading... 

/content/journal/jmm/10.1099/0022-1317-50-11-996 

Most read this month 

Article 

content/journal/jmm 

Journal 

5 

3 

false 

en 

Most cited Most Cited RSS feed 

Emerging tick-borne pathogens of public health importance: a mini-review 

Ilia Rochlin and Alvaro Toledo 

Healthcare-associated infections, medical devices and biofilms: risk, tolerance and control 

Steven L. Percival , Louise Suleman , Claudia Vuotto and Gianfranco Donelli 

Progress in the investigation of the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio as a potential pathogenic factor in ulcerative colitis 

Yu Yin , Tiezheng Yang , Ziyue Tian , Chong Shi , Chengqiu Yan , Hui Li , Yu Du and Guofeng Li 

Antifungal activity of the clove essential oil from Syzygium aromaticum on Candida , Aspergillus and dermatophyte species 

Eugénia Pinto , Luís Vale-Silva , Carlos Cavaleiro and Lígia Salgueiro 

Candida species: current epidemiology, pathogenicity, biofilm formation, natural antifungal products and new therapeutic options 

J. C. O. Sardi , L. Scorzoni , T. Bernardi , A. M. Fusco-Almeida and M. J. S. Mendes Giannini 

The role of Akkermansia muciniphila in obesity, diabetes and atherosclerosis 

Alka Hasani , Saba Ebrahimzadeh , Fatemeh Hemmati , Aytak Khabbaz , Akbar Hasani and Pourya Gholizadeh 

Serratia marcescens 

A. Hejazi and F. R. Falkiner 

PCR characterization and typing of Klebsiella pneumoniae using capsular type-specific, variable number tandem repeat and virulence gene targets 

Jane F. Turton , Claire Perry , Suzanne Elgohari and Catherine V. Hampton 

Investigation of LuxS-mediated quorum sensing in Klebsiella pneumoniae 

Lijiang Chen , Jonathan J. Wilksch , Haiyang Liu , Xiaoxiao Zhang , Von V. L. Torres , Wenzi Bi , Eric Mandela , Jianming Cao , Jiahui Li , Trevor Lithgow and Tieli Zhou 

Mechanisms of ciprofloxacin resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa : new approaches to an old problem 

Attika Rehman , Wayne M. Patrick and Iain L. Lamont 

More Less 

Toggle navigation Tools 

We Recommend 

Access key 

Subscribed content 

Open Access content 

Free Trial content 

Free content 

First article published in Microbiology Outlooks 

Discover the new commentary by Dr Damien F. Meyer, connecting within-host genomics and evolutionary theory, reframing virulence not as a fixed trait, but context-dependent strategy. 

Open Access for another year 

Under our Subscribe to Open (S2O) model, Journal of Medical Microbiology is publishing fully Open Access for another year. See if you’re covered for fee-free publishing under an institutional agreement. 

Back to top 

About Us 

Microbiology Society 

Our staff 

License agreements 

Terms and conditions 

Privacy policy 

Accessibility statement 

Contact us 

Discover our portfolio 

Microbiology 

Journal of General Virology 

Journal of Medical Microbiology 

Microbial Genomics 

International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology 

Access Microbiology , an open research platform 

JMM Case Reports 

Resources 

Information for authors 

Information for reviewers 

Routes to Open Access 

Information for librarians 

FAQs 

Rights and permissions 

Reprints and advertising 

© 2026 Microbiology Society. Registered as a Charity in England and Wales 264017. A Charity registered in Scotland SC039250. Company Limited by Guarantee. Registered in England 1039582. 

This is a required field 

Please enter a valid email address 

Approval was a Success 

Invalid data 

An error occurred 

Approval was partially successful, following selected items could not be processed due to error 

Microbiology Society: 

http://instance.metastore.ingenta.com/content/journal/jmm/10.1099/0022-1317-50-11-996 

10.1099/0022-1317-50-11-996 

SEARCH_EXPAND_ITEM 

× 
Susceptibility patterns of enteroaggregative Escherichia coli associated with traveller's diarrhoea: emergence of quinolone resistance 

Publication Date: 01 Nov 2001 
https://doi.org/10.1099/0022-1317-50-11-996 

1310565780 

Online Option 

Get immediate access to your online copy - available in PDF and ePub formats 

Price: £22.50 (excl. VAT) 
Buy Online Access 

Cancel
