PMID: 11850242
PMCID: PMC127466
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.46.3.638-645.2002
Title: Molecular characterization of a novel class 1 integron containing bla(GES-1) and a fused product of aac3-Ib/aac6'-Ib' gene cassettes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2002 Mar
Authors: Dubois V, Poirel L, Marie C, Arpin C, Nordmann P, Quentin C
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
As seen by the disk diffusion method, the clinical strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa Pa695, resistant to all extended-spectrum cephalosporins and aminoglycosides, exhibited an unusual synergistic effect between ceftazidime and imipenem. This isolate produced an extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) with a pI of 5.8 that appeared to be chromosomally encoded. Cloning experiments revealed that this ESBL was encoded by bla GES-1 , previously described in an integron from Klebsiella pneumoniae . In P. aeruginosa Pa695, a higher level of resistance to ceftazidime than to ticarcillin was observed, and no synergy between the β-lactamase inhibitors and extended-spectrum cephalosporins was detected, in contrast to the resistance pattern observed in K. pneumoniae . Further sequence analysis demonstrated that the bla GES-1 gene cassette was located in a class 1 integron, which contained another sequence corresponding to the fused aac(3)-Ib and aac(6 " )-Ib " gene cassettes. The fusion product was functional, as was the product of each gene cloned separately: AAC(3)-I, despite the deletion of the four last amino acids, and AAC(6"), which carried three amino acid changes compared with the most homologous sequence. The AAC(3)-I protein conferred an expected gentamicin and fortimicin resistance, and the AAC(6"), despite the Leu-119→Ser substitution, yielded resistance to kanamycin, tobramycin, and dibekacin, but slightly affected netilmicin and amikacin, and had no apparent effect on gentamicin. The fusion product conveyed a large profile of resistance, combining the AAC(6") activity with a higher level of gentamicin resistance without accompanying fortimicin resistance.
