PMID: 12019096
PMCID: PMC127251
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.46.6.1823-1830.2002
Title: CAU-1, a subclass B3 metallo-beta-lactamase of low substrate affinity encoded by an ortholog present in the Caulobacter crescentus chromosome.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2002 Jun
Authors: Docquier JD, Pantanella F, Giuliani F, Thaller MC, Amicosante G, Galleni M, Frère JM, Bush K, Rossolini GM
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
The sequenced chromosome of Caulobacter crescentus CB15 encodes a hypothetical protein that exhibits significant similarity (30 to 35% identical residues) to metallo-β-lactamases of subclass B3. An allelic variant of this gene (divergent by 3% of its nucleotides) was cloned in Escherichia coli from C. crescentus type strain DSM4727. Expression studies confirmed the metallo-β-lactamase activity of its product, CAU-1. The enzyme produced in E. coli was purified by two ion-exchange chromatography steps. CAU-1 contains a 29-kDa polypeptide with an alkaline isoelectric pH (>9), and unlike the L1 enzyme of Stenotrophomonas maltophilia , the native form is monomeric. Kinetic analysis revealed a preferential activity toward penicillins, carbapenems, and narrow-spectrum cephalosporins, while oxyimino cephalosporins were poorly or not hydrolyzed. Affinities for the various β-lactams were poor overall ( K m values were always >100 μM and often >400 μM). The interaction with divalent ion chelators appeared to occur by a mechanism similar to that prevailing in other members of subclass B3. In C. crescentus , the CAU-1 enzyme is produced independently of β-lactam exposure and, interestingly, the bla CAU determinant is bracketed by three other genes, including two genes encoding enzymes involved in methionine biosynthesis and a gene encoding a putative transcriptional regulator, in an operon-like structure. The CAU-1 enzyme is the first example of a metallo-β-lactamase in a member of the α subdivision of the class Proteobacteria .
