PMID: 15827636
PMCID: 
DOI: 10.1039/b501199j
Title: The neomycin biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces fradiae NCIMB 8233: characterisation of an aminotransferase involved in the formation of 2-deoxystreptamine.
Journal: Organic & biomolecular chemistry
PubDate: 2005 Apr 21
Authors: Huang F, Haydock SF, Mironenko T, Spiteller D, Li Y, Spencer JB
Source: Publisher_HTML
License: publisher_free_full_text

## PUBLISHER_HTML
The neomycin biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces fradiae NCIMB 8233: characterisation of an aminotransferase involved in the formation of 2-deoxystreptamine - Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry (RSC Publishing) 

Jump to main content 

Jump to site search 

Publishing 

Journals 

Books 

Databases 

Search 
Advanced 

Search 

You must enter a search term 

Advanced search 

Issue 8, 2005 

Previous Article 

Next Article 

From the journal: 
Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry 

The neomycin biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces fradiae NCIMB 8233: characterisation of an aminotransferase involved in the formation of 2-deoxystreptamine † 

Fanglu
Huang , a Stephen F.
Haydock , b Tatiana
Mironenko , b Dieter
Spiteller , b Yanyan
Li a and Jonathan B.
Spencer * a 

Author affiliations 

* Corresponding authors 

a University Chemical Laboratory, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge, United Kingdom E-mail: jbs20@cam.ac.uk Fax: +44 1223 336362 Tel: +44 1223 331696 

b Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, United Kingdom 

Abstract 

The biosynthetic gene cluster of the 2-deoxystreptamine (DOS)-containing aminoglycoside antibiotic neomycin has been cloned for the first time by screening of a cosmid library of Streptomyces fradiae NCIMB 8233. Sequence analysis has identified 21 putative open reading frames (ORFs) in the neomycin gene cluster ( neo ) with significant protein sequence similarity to gene products involved in the biosynthesis of other DOS-containing aminoglycosides, namely butirosin ( btr ), gentamycin ( gnt ), tobramycin ( tbm ) and kanamycin ( kan ). Located at the 5′-end of the neo gene cluster is the previously-characterised neomycin phosphotransferase gene ( apH ). Three genes unique to the neo and btr clusters have been revealed by comparison of the neo cluster to btr , gnt , tbm and kan clusters. This suggests that these three genes may be involved in the transfer of a ribose moiety to the DOS ring during the antibiotic biosynthesis. The product of the neo - 6 gene is characterised here as the L -glutamine : 2-deoxy- scyllo -inosose aminotransferase responsible for the first transamination in DOS biosynthesis, which supports the assignment of the gene cluster. 

You have access to this article 

Please wait while we load your content... Something went wrong. Try again? 

About 

Cited by 

Related 

Download options Please wait... 

Article information 

DOI https://doi.org/10.1039/B501199J 

Article type Paper 

Submitted 25 Jan 2005 

Accepted 15 Feb 2005 

First published 21 Mar 2005 

Download Citation 

Org. Biomol. Chem. , 2005, 3 , 1410-1418 
BibTex EndNote MEDLINE ProCite ReferenceManager RefWorks RIS 

Permissions 

Request permissions 

The neomycin biosynthetic gene cluster of Streptomyces fradiae NCIMB 8233: characterisation of an aminotransferase involved in the formation of 2-deoxystreptamine 

F. Huang, S. F. Haydock, T. Mironenko, D. Spiteller, Y. Li and J. B. Spencer, Org. Biomol. Chem. , 2005, 3 , 1410 DOI: 10.1039/B501199J 

To request permission to reproduce material from this article, please go to the Copyright Clearance Center request page . 

If you are an author contributing to an RSC publication, you do not need to request permission provided correct acknowledgement is given. 

If you are the author of this article, you do not need to request permission to reproduce figures 
 and diagrams provided correct acknowledgement is given. If you want to reproduce the whole article 
 in a third-party publication (excluding your thesis/dissertation for which permission is not required) 
 please go to the Copyright Clearance Center request page . 

Read more about how to correctly acknowledge RSC content . 

Social activity 

Tweet 

Share 

Search articles by author 

Fanglu Huang 

Stephen F. Haydock 

Tatiana Mironenko 

Dieter Spiteller 

Yanyan Li 

Jonathan B. Spencer 

Fetching data from CrossRef. This may take some time to load. 

Loading related content 

Spotlight 

Advertisements 

rsc.org 

Journals, books & databases 

Home 

About us 

Membership & professional community 

Campaigning & outreach 

Journals, books & databases 

Teaching & learning 

News & events 

Locations & contacts 

Careers 

Awards & funding 

Advertise 

Help & legal 

Privacy policy 

Terms & conditions 

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube 

© Royal Society of Chemistry 2026 Registered charity number: 207890 

This website collects cookies to deliver a better user experience. See how this site uses Cookies . Do not sell my personal data . 

Este site coleta cookies para oferecer uma melhor experiência ao usuário. Veja como este site usa Cookies . 

Publishing 

Journals 

Current Journals 

Archive Journals 

All Journals 

Books 

Browse Books 

Series 

For Authors and Editors 

About 

Databases 

Literature Updates 

ChemSpider 

The Merck Index* 

MarinLit 

More 

For Members 

For Librarians 

Subscribe 

RSS Feeds 

Blogs 

Chemistry World 

Education in Chemistry 

Open Access 

Historical Collection
