PMID: 15980372
PMCID: PMC1168656
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.49.7.2941-2948.2005
Title: Identification of a new allelic variant of the Acinetobacter baumannii cephalosporinase, ADC-7 beta-lactamase: defining a unique family of class C enzymes.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2005 Jul
Authors: Hujer KM, Hamza NS, Hujer AM, Perez F, Helfand MS, Bethel CR, Thomson JM, Anderson VE, Barlow M, Rice LB, Tenover FC, Bonomo RA
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Acinetobacter spp. are emerging as opportunistic hospital pathogens that demonstrate resistance to many classes of antibiotics. In a metropolitan hospital in Cleveland, a clinical isolate of Acinetobacter baumannii that tested resistant to cefepime and ceftazidime (MIC = 32 μg/ml) was identified. Herein, we sought to determine the molecular basis for the extended-spectrum-cephalosporin resistance. Using analytical isoelectric focusing, a β-lactamase with a pI of ≥9.2 was detected. PCR amplification with specific A. baumannii cephalosporinase primers yielded a 1,152-bp product which, when sequenced, identified a novel 383-amino-acid class C enzyme. Expressed in Escherichia coli DH10B, this β-lactamase demonstrated greater resistance against ceftazidime and cefotaxime than cefepime (4.0 μg/ml versus 0.06 μg/ml). The kinetic characteristics of this β-lactamase were similar to other cephalosporinases found in Acinetobacter spp. In addition, this cephalosporinase was inhibited by meropenem, imipenem, ertapenem, and sulopenem ( K i < 40 μM). The amino acid compositions of this novel enzyme and other class C β-lactamases thus far described for A. baumannii , Acinetobacter genomic species 3, and Oligella urethralis in Europe and South Africa suggest that this cephalosporinase defines a unique family of class C enzymes. We propose a uniform designation for this family of cephalosporinases ( Acinetobacter - d erived c ephalosporinases [ADC]) found in Acinetobacter spp. and identify this enzyme as ADC-7 β-lactamase. The coalescence of Acinetobacter ampC β-lactamases into a single common ancestor and the substantial phylogenetic distance separating them from other ampC genes support the logical value of developing a system of nomenclature for these Acinetobacter cephalosporinase genes.
