PMID: 18563261
PMCID: 
DOI: 10.1039/b802311e
Title: Structural basis for the broad-spectrum inhibition of metallo-beta-lactamases by thiols.
Journal: Organic & biomolecular chemistry
PubDate: 2008 Jul 7
Authors: Liénard BM, Garau G, Horsfall L, Karsisiotis AI, Damblon C, Lassaux P, Papamicael C, Roberts GC, Galleni M, Dideberg O, Frère JM, Schofield CJ
Source: Publisher_HTML
License: publisher_free_full_text

## PUBLISHER_HTML
Structural basis for the broad-spectrum inhibition of metallo-β-lactamases by thiols - Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry (RSC Publishing) 

Jump to main content 

Jump to site search 

Publishing 

Journals 

Books 

Databases 

Search 
Advanced 

Search 

You must enter a search term 

Advanced search 

Issue 13, 2008 

Previous Article 

Next Article 

From the journal: 
Organic & Biomolecular Chemistry 

Structural basis for the broad-spectrum inhibition of metallo-β-lactamases by thiols † 

Benoît M. R.
Liénard , a Gianpiero
Garau , ‡ b Louise
Horsfall , c Andreas I.
Karsisiotis , § d Christian
Damblon , § d Patricia
Lassaux , c Cyril
Papamicael , ¶ a Gordon C. K.
Roberts , d Moreno
Galleni , c Otto
Dideberg , b Jean-Marie
Frère c and Christopher J.
Schofield * a 

Author affiliations 

* Corresponding authors 

a Chemistry Research Laboratory and OCISB, University of Oxford, 12 Mansfield Road, Oxford, UK E-mail: Christopher.schofield@chem.ox.ac.uk Fax: +44 (0) 1865 275 674 Tel: +44 (0) 1865 275 625 

b Institut de Biologie Structurale Jean-Pierre Ebel (CNRS/CEA/UJF), 41 Rue J. Horowitz, Grenoble, France 

c Centre d'Ingéniérie des Protéines, Université de Liège, Allée de 6 Aout B6, Sart-Tilman, Liège, Belgium 

d Henry Wellcome Laboratories of Structural Biology, Biochemistry Department, University of Leicester, Rm 1/02, Henry Wellcome Building, Lancaster Road, Leicester, UK 

Abstract 

The development of broad-spectrum metallo- β-lactamase (MBL) inhibitors is challenging due to structural diversity and differences in metal utilisation by these enzymes. Analysis of structural data, followed by non-denturing mass spectrometric analyses, identified thiols proposed to inhibit representative MBLs from all three sub-classes: B1, B2 and B3. Solution analyses led to the identification of broad spectrum inhibitors, including potent inhibitors of the CphA MBL ( Aeromonas hydrophila ). Structural studies revealed that, as observed for other B1 and B3 MBLs, inhibition of the L1 MBL thiols involves metal chelation . Evidence is reported that this is not the case for inhibition of the CphA enzyme by some thiols ; the crystal structure of the CphA–Zn–inhibitor complex reveals a binding mode in which the thiol does not interact with the zinc. The structural data enabled the design and the production of further more potent inhibitors. Overall the results suggest that the development of reasonably broad-spectrum MBL inhibitors should be possible. 

You have access to this article 

Please wait while we load your content... Something went wrong. Try again? 

About 

Cited by 

Related 

Download options Please wait... 

Supplementary files 

X-Ray crystallographic data; additional NMR data PDF (436K) 

Article information 

DOI https://doi.org/10.1039/B802311E 

Article type Paper 

Submitted 25 Feb 2008 

Accepted 25 Mar 2008 

First published 07 May 2008 

Download Citation 

Org. Biomol. Chem. , 2008, 6 , 2282-2294 
BibTex EndNote MEDLINE ProCite ReferenceManager RefWorks RIS 

Permissions 

Request permissions 

Structural basis for the broad-spectrum inhibition of metallo- β-lactamases by thiols 

B. M. R. Liénard, G. Garau, L. Horsfall, A. I. Karsisiotis, C. Damblon, P. Lassaux, C. Papamicael, G. C. K. Roberts, M. Galleni, O. Dideberg, J. Frère and C. J. Schofield, Org. Biomol. Chem. , 2008, 6 , 2282 DOI: 10.1039/B802311E 

To request permission to reproduce material from this article, please go to the Copyright Clearance Center request page . 

If you are an author contributing to an RSC publication, you do not need to request permission provided correct acknowledgement is given. 

If you are the author of this article, you do not need to request permission to reproduce figures 
 and diagrams provided correct acknowledgement is given. If you want to reproduce the whole article 
 in a third-party publication (excluding your thesis/dissertation for which permission is not required) 
 please go to the Copyright Clearance Center request page . 

Read more about how to correctly acknowledge RSC content . 

Social activity 

Tweet 

Share 

Search articles by author 

Benoît M. R. Liénard 

Gianpiero Garau 

Louise Horsfall 

Andreas I. Karsisiotis 

Christian Damblon 

Patricia Lassaux 

Cyril Papamicael 

Gordon C. K. Roberts 

Moreno Galleni 

Otto Dideberg 

Jean-Marie Frère 

Christopher J. Schofield 

Fetching data from CrossRef. This may take some time to load. 

Loading related content 

Spotlight 

Advertisements 

rsc.org 

Journals, books & databases 

Home 

About us 

Membership & professional community 

Campaigning & outreach 

Journals, books & databases 

Teaching & learning 

News & events 

Locations & contacts 

Careers 

Awards & funding 

Advertise 

Help & legal 

Privacy policy 

Terms & conditions 

Facebook Twitter LinkedIn YouTube 

© Royal Society of Chemistry 2026 Registered charity number: 207890 

This website collects cookies to deliver a better user experience. See how this site uses Cookies . Do not sell my personal data . 

Este site coleta cookies para oferecer uma melhor experiência ao usuário. Veja como este site usa Cookies . 

Publishing 

Journals 

Current Journals 

Archive Journals 

All Journals 

Books 

Browse Books 

Series 

For Authors and Editors 

About 

Databases 

Literature Updates 

ChemSpider 

The Merck Index* 

MarinLit 

More 

For Members 

For Librarians 

Subscribe 

RSS Feeds 

Blogs 

Chemistry World 

Education in Chemistry 

Open Access 

Historical Collection
