PMID: 19684139
PMCID: PMC2753038
DOI: 10.1128/JB.00668-09
Title: tISCpe8, an IS1595-family lincomycin resistance element located on a conjugative plasmid in Clostridium perfringens.
Journal: Journal of bacteriology
PubDate: 2009 Oct
Authors: Lyras D, Adams V, Ballard SA, Teng WL, Howarth PM, Crellin PK, Bannam TL, Songer JG, Rood JI
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Clostridium perfringens is a normal gastrointestinal organism that is a reservoir for antibiotic resistance genes and can potentially act as a source from which mobile elements and their associated resistance determinants can be transferred to other bacterial pathogens. Lincomycin resistance in C. perfringens is common and is usually encoded by erm genes that confer macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B resistance. In this study we identified strains that are lincomycin resistant but erythromycin sensitive and showed that the lincomycin resistance determinant was plasmid borne and could be transferred to other C. perfringens isolates by conjugation. The plasmid, pJIR2774, is the first conjugative C. perfringens R-plasmid to be identified that does not confer tetracycline resistance. Further analysis showed that resistance was encoded by the lnuP gene, which encoded a putative lincosamide nucleotidyltransferase and was located on tIS Cpe8 , a functional transposable genetic element that was a member of the IS 1595 family of transposon-like insertion sequences. This element had significant similarity to the mobilizable lincomycin resistance element tIS Sag10 from Streptococcus agalactiae . Like tIS Sag10 , tIS Cpe8 carries a functional origin of transfer within the resistance gene, allowing the element to be mobilized by the conjugative transposon Tn 916 . The similarity of these elements and the finding that they both contain an oriT -like region support the hypothesis that conjugation may result in the movement of DNA modules that are not obviously mobile since they are not linked to conjugation or mobilization functions. This process likely plays a significant role in bacterial adaptation and evolution.
