PMID: 20124004
PMCID: PMC2849387
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01252-09
Title: Genetic and biochemical characterization of TRU-1, the endogenous class C beta-lactamase from Aeromonas enteropelogenes.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2010 Apr
Authors: De Luca F, Giraud-Morin C, Rossolini GM, Docquier JD, Fosse T
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Aeromonas enteropelogenes (formerly A. tructi ) was described to be an ampicillin-susceptible and cephalothin-resistant Aeromonas species, which suggests the production of a cephalosporinase. Strain ATCC 49803 was susceptible to amoxicillin, cefotaxime, and imipenem but resistant to cefazolin (MICs of 2, 0.032, 0.125, and >256 μg/ml, respectively) and produced an inducible β-lactamase. Cefotaxime-resistant mutants (MIC, 32 μg/ml) that showed constitutive β-lactamase production could be selected in vitro . The gene coding for the cephalosporinase of A. enteropelogenes ATCC 49803 was cloned, and its biochemical properties were investigated. Escherichia coli transformants showing resistance to various β-lactams carried a 3.5-kb plasmid insert whose sequence revealed a 1,146-bp open reading frame (ORF) encoding a class C β-lactamase, named TRU-1, showing the highest identity scores with A. punctata CAV-1 (75%), A. salmonicida AmpC (75%), and A. hydrophila CepH (71%). The bla TRU-1 locus includes open reading frames (ORFs) showing significant homology with genes found in the genomes of other Aeromonas species, although it exhibits a different organization, as reflected by the presence of additional ORFs located downstream of the β-lactamase gene in the A. hydrophila and A. salmonicida genomes. Specific PCR assays were negative for cphA -like and bla OXA-12 -like genes in three A. enteropelogenes ATCC strains. Purified TRU-1 showed a broad substrate profile, efficiently hydrolyzing benzylpenicillin, cephalothin, cefoxitin, and, although with significantly lower turnover rates, oxyiminocephalosporins. Cephaloridine and cefepime were poorly recognized by the enzyme, as reflected by the high K m values observed with these substrates. Thus far, A. enteropelogenes represents the only known example of an Aeromonas species that produces only one β-lactamase belonging to molecular class C.
