PMID: 20679504
PMCID: PMC2944575
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00356-10
Title: Origin and molecular evolution of the determinant of methicillin resistance in staphylococci.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2010 Oct
Authors: Tsubakishita S, Kuwahara-Arai K, Sasaki T, Hiramatsu K
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is one of the most important multidrug-resistant pathogens around the world. MRSA is generated when methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) exogenously acquires a methicillin resistance gene, mecA , carried by a mobile genetic element, staphylococcal cassette chromosome mec (SCC mec ), which is speculated to be transmissible across staphylococcal species. However, the origin/reservoir of the mecA gene has remained unclear. Finding the origin/reservoir of the mecA gene is important for understanding the evolution of MRSA. Moreover, it may contribute to more effective control measures for MRSA. Here we report on one of the animal-related Staphylococcus species, S. fleurettii , as the highly probable origin of the mecA gene. The mecA gene of S. fleurettii was found on the chromosome linked with the essential genes for the growth of staphylococci and was not associated with SCC mec . The mecA locus of the S. fleurettii chromosome has a sequence practically identical to that of the mecA -containing region (∼12 kbp long) of SCC mec . Furthermore, by analyzing the corresponding gene loci (over 20 kbp in size) of S. sciuri and S. vitulinus , which evolved from a common ancestor with that of S. fleurettii , the speciation-related mecA gene homologues were identified, indicating that mecA of S. fleurettii descended from its ancestor and was not recently acquired. It is speculated that SCC mec came into form by adopting the S. fleurettii mecA gene and its surrounding chromosomal region. Our finding suggests that SCC mec was generated in Staphylococcus cells living in animals by acquiring the intrinsic mecA region of S. fleurettii , which is a commensal bacterium of animals.
