PMID: 20713681
PMCID: PMC2976166
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00798-09
Title: Characterization of two newly identified genes, vgaD and vatH, [corrected] conferring resistance to streptogramin A in Enterococcus faecium.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2010 Nov
Authors: Jung YH, Shin ES, Kim O, Yoo JS, Lee KM, Yoo JI, Chung GT, Lee YS
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
We characterized two new streptogramin A resistance genes from quinupristin-dalfopristin-resistant Enterococcus faecium JS79, which was selected from 79 E. faecium isolates lacking known genes encoding streptogramin A acetyltransferase. A 5,650-bp fragment of HindIII-digested plasmid DNA from E. faecium JS79 was cloned and sequenced. The fragment contained two open reading frames carrying resistance genes related to streptogramin A, namely, genes for an acetyltransferase and an ATP efflux pump. The first open reading frame comprised 648 bp encoding 216 amino acids with a predicted left-handed parallel β-helix domain structure; this new gene was designated vatG . The second open reading frame consisted of 1,575 bp encoding 525 amino acids with two predicted ATPase binding cassette transporters comprised of Walker A, Walker B, and LSSG motifs; this gene was designated vgaD . vgaD is located 65 bp upstream from vatG , was detected together with vatG in 12 of 179 quinupristin-dalfopristin-resistant E. faecium isolates, and was located on the same plasmid. Also, the 5.6-kb HindIII-digested fragment which was observed in JS79 was detected in nine vgaD - and vatG -containing E. faecium isolates by Southern hybridization. Therefore, it was expected that these two genes were strongly correlated with each other and that they may be composed of a transposon. Importantly, vgaD is the first identified ABC transporter conferring resistance to streptogramin A in E. faecium . Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis patterns and sequence types of vgaD - and vatG -containing E. faecium isolates differed for isolates from humans and nonhumans.
