PMID: 21317317
PMCID: PMC3133018
DOI: 10.1128/JB.00162-10
Title: An Enterotoxin-Bearing Pathogenicity Island in Staphylococcus epidermidis.
Journal: Journal of bacteriology
PubDate: 2011 Apr
Authors: Madhusoodanan J, Seo KS, Remortel B, Park JY, Hwang SY, Fox LK, Park YH, Deobald CF, Wang D, Liu S, Daugherty SC, Gill AL, Bohach GA, Gill SR
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Cocolonization of human mucosal surfaces causes frequent encounters between various staphylococcal species, creating opportunities for the horizontal acquisition of mobile genetic elements. The majority of Staphylococcus aureus toxins and virulence factors are encoded on S. aureus pathogenicity islands (SaPIs). Horizontal movement of SaPIs between S. aureus strains plays a role in the evolution of virulent clinical isolates. Although there have been reports of the production of toxic shock syndrome toxin 1 (TSST-1), enterotoxin, and other superantigens by coagulase-negative staphylococci, no associated pathogenicity islands have been found in the genome of Staphylococcus epidermidis , a generally less virulent relative of S. aureus . We show here the first evidence of a composite S . e pidermidis p athogenicity i sland (SePI), the product of multiple insertions in the genome of a clinical isolate. The taxonomic placement of S. epidermidis strain FRI909 was confirmed by a number of biochemical tests and multilocus sequence typing. The genome sequence of this strain was analyzed for other unique gene clusters and their locations. This pathogenicity island encodes and expresses staphylococcal enterotoxin C3 (SEC3) and staphylococcal enterotoxin-like toxin L (SElL), as confirmed by quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) and immunoblotting. We present here an initial characterization of this novel pathogenicity island, and we establish that it is stable, expresses enterotoxins, and is not obviously transmissible by phage transduction. We also describe the genome sequence, excision, replication, and packaging of a novel bacteriophage in S. epidermidis FRI909, as well as attempts to mobilize the SePI element by this phage.
