PMID: 23836170
PMCID: PMC3754343
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01030-13
Title: Genetic basis for in vitro and in vivo resistance to lincosamides, streptogramins A, and pleuromutilins (LSAP phenotype) in Enterococcus faecium.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2013 Sep
Authors: Isnard C, Malbruny B, Leclercq R, Cattoir V
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
As opposed to Enterococcus faecalis , which is intrinsically resistant to lincosamides, streptogramins A, and pleuromutilins (LS A P phenotype) by production of the ABC protein Lsa(A), Enterococcus faecium is naturally susceptible. Since this phenotype may be selected for in vivo by quinupristin-dalfopristin (Q-D), the aim of this study was to investigate the molecular mechanism of acquired LS A P resistance in E. faecium . Six LS A P-resistant in vitro mutants of E. faecium HM1070 as well as three different pairs of clinical isolates (pre- and postexposure to Q-D) were studied. The full genome sequence of an in vitro mutant ( E. faecium UCN90B) was determined by using 454 sequencing technology and was compared with that of the parental strain. Single-nucleotide replacement was carried out to confirm the role of this mutation. By comparative genomic analysis, a point mutation was found within a 1,503-bp gene coding for an ABC homologue showing 66% amino acid identity with Lsa(A). This mutation (C1349T) led to an amino acid substitution (Thr450Ile). An identical mutation was identified in all in vitro and in vivo resistant strains but was not present in susceptible strains. The wild-type allele was named eat (A) (for E nterococcus A BC t ransporter), and its mutated allelic variant was named eat (A) v . The introduction of eat (A) v from UCN90B into HM1070 conferred the LS A P phenotype, whereas that of eat (A) from HM1070 into UCN90B restored susceptibility entirely. This is the first description of the molecular mechanism of acquired LS A P resistance in E. faecium . Characterization of the biochemical mechanism of resistance and the physiological role of this ABC protein need further investigations.
