PMID: 23892737
PMCID: PMC3811354
DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01740-13
Title: Molecular typing of CTX-M-producing escherichia coli isolates from environmental water, swine feces, specimens from healthy humans, and human patients.
Journal: Applied and environmental microbiology
PubDate: 2013 Oct
Authors: Hu YY, Cai JC, Zhou HW, Chi D, Zhang XF, Chen WL, Zhang R, Chen GX
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
CTX-M-producing Escherichia coli is the predominant type of extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)-producing E. coli worldwide. In this study, molecular typing was conducted for 139 CTX-M-producing E. coli isolates, phenotypically positive for ESBLs, isolated from environmental water, swine, healthy humans, and hospitalized patients in Hangzhou, China. The antibiotic resistance profiles of the isolates for the cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones were determined. The isolates showed 100% resistance to cefotaxime and ceftriaxone while maintaining relatively high susceptibility to cefoxitin, cefepime, and ceftazidime. A total of 61.9% (86/139) of the isolates, regardless of origin, showed high resistance to fluoroquinolones. PCRs and DNA sequencing indicated that bla CTX-M-14 was the most prevalent CTX-M-9 group gene and that bla CTX-M-15 and bla CTX-M-55 were the dominant CTX-M-1 group genes. Isolates from all sources with CTX-M types belonging to the CTX-M-1 or CTX-M-9 group were most frequently associated with epidemics. Molecular homology analysis of the isolates, conducted by phylogenetic grouping, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE), and multilocus sequence typing (MLST), demonstrated that the dominant clones belonged to B2-ST131, D-ST648, D-ST38, or A-CC10. These four sequence types (STs) were discovered in E. coli isolates both from humans and from environmental water, suggesting frequent and continuous intercompartment transmission between humans and the aquatic environment. Seven novel sequence types were identified in the current study. In conclusion, this study is the first to report the molecular homology analysis of CTX-M-producing E. coli isolates collected from water, swine, and healthy and hospitalized humans, suggesting that pathogens in the environment might originate both from humans and from animals.
