PMID: 24048528
PMCID: PMC3838021
DOI: 10.1128/JCM.01774-13
Title: First case of Streptococcus lutetiensis bacteremia involving a clindamycin-resistant isolate carrying the lnuB gene.
Journal: Journal of clinical microbiology
PubDate: 2013 Dec
Authors: Almuzara M, Bonofiglio L, Cittadini R, Vera Ocampo C, Montilla A, Del Castillo M, Ramirez MS, Mollerach M, Vay C
Source: OA_HTML
License: pmc_html_oa

## OA_HTML
First Case of Streptococcus lutetiensis Bacteremia Involving a Clindamycin-Resistant Isolate Carrying the lnuB Gene - PMC 
Skip to main content 

An official website of the United States government 
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 

Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official
 government organization in the United States. 

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely
 connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
 information only on official, secure websites. 

Search 
Log in 

Dashboard 

Publications 

Account settings 

Log out 

Search… Search NCBI 

Primary site navigation 
Search 

Logged in as: 

Dashboard 

Publications 

Account settings 

Log in 

Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC 

Journal List 

User Guide 

PERMALINK 

Copy 

As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
 the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice 

J Clin Microbiol 
. 2013 Dec;51(12):4259–4261. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01774-13 

Search in PMC 

Search in PubMed 

View in NLM Catalog 

Add to search 

First Case of Streptococcus lutetiensis Bacteremia Involving a Clindamycin-Resistant Isolate Carrying the lnuB Gene 

M Almuzara 

M Almuzara 

Laboratorio de Bacteriología, Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martín, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina a 

Find articles by M Almuzara 

a , L Bonofiglio 

L Bonofiglio 

Cátedra de Microbiología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina b 

Find articles by L Bonofiglio 

b , R Cittadini 

R Cittadini 

Sanatorio Mater Dei, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina c 

Find articles by R Cittadini 

c , C Vera Ocampo 

C Vera Ocampo 

Sanatorio Mater Dei, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina c 

Find articles by C Vera Ocampo 

c , A Montilla 

A Montilla 

Cátedra de Microbiología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina b 

Find articles by A Montilla 

b , M del Castillo 

M del Castillo 

Sanatorio Mater Dei, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina c 

Find articles by M del Castillo 

c , M S Ramirez 

M S Ramirez 

Instituto de Microbiología y Parasitología Médica (IMPaM, UBA-CONICET), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina d 

Find articles by M S Ramirez 

d , M Mollerach 

M Mollerach 

Cátedra de Microbiología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina b 

Find articles by M Mollerach 

b , C Vay 

C Vay 

Laboratorio de Bacteriología, Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martín, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina a 

Sanatorio Mater Dei, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina c 

Find articles by C Vay 

a, c, ✉ 

Author information 

Article notes 

Copyright and License information 

Laboratorio de Bacteriología, Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Hospital de Clínicas José de San Martín, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina a 

Cátedra de Microbiología, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina b 

Sanatorio Mater Dei, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina c 

Instituto de Microbiología y Parasitología Médica (IMPaM, UBA-CONICET), Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina d 

✉ 
Address correspondence to C. Vay, cavay@fibertel.com.ar . 

✉ 
Corresponding author. 

Received 2013 Jul 9; Revision requested 2013 Aug 20; Accepted 2013 Sep 9. 

Copyright © 2013, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved. 

PMC Copyright notice 

PMCID: PMC3838021  PMID: 24048528 

Abstract 

Here, we describe the first case of a Streptococcus lutetiensis isolate harboring the lnuB gene. 

CASE REPORT 

A 70-year-old male patient had a history of fever, epigastric, and right flank pain of 1 month of evolution. One week prior to admission, residual choledochal microlithiasis without bile duct dilatation was found on echoendoscopy. The patient had had a cholecystectomy 10 years before. 

On the night before the emergency room consultation, the patient had postprandial epigastralgia, fever, and chills; therefore, his hospitalization was decided. During hospitalization, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed, showing microgallstones. They were removed by the use of a Dormia basket and an extraction balloon catheter. The admission diagnosis was cholangitis due to residual lithiasis. 

Admission laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell count, 4,900/mm 3 (with 86% neutrophils); hematocrit, 37%; kaolin partial thromboplastin time (KPTT), 34 s; and prothrombin time, 70%. Liver function test results were as follows: alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 716 U/liter (normal, <35 U/liter); aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 218 U/liter (normal, <35 U/liter); total bilirubin, 0.7 mg/dl (normal, <1.0 mg/dl); direct bilirubin, 0.3 (normal, <0.3 mg/dl); alkaline phosphatase, 353 U/liter (normal, <279 U/liter); and total cholesterol, 103 mg/dl (normal, 150 to 200 mg/dl). 

In two blood culture bottles taken on admission, after 24 h of incubation, growth of Streptococcus infantarius with Escherichia coli was obtained. 

Phenotypic identification was carried out by conventional biochemical tests ( 1 ). The organism was identified as Streptococcus infantarius ; however, it was not possible to determine the subspecies by this methodology. In addition, we used the GP card of a Vitek 2 system (bioMérieux, Marcy-l'Etoile, France). The bionumber obtained was 141011164717711, giving an identification of S. infantarius subsp. coli / Streptococcus bovis with an excellent confidence level. Identification was also carried out by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time of flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry (MS) (Bruker Daltonik), showing a spectral score of 2.223 for Streptococcus lutetiensis ( 2 ). 

PCR amplification of the 16S rRNA gene was performed in order to reach definitive identification. A PCR product of the 16S rRNA gene, using the primers described by Weisburg et al. ( 3 ), was obtained with the Taq DNA polymerase based on the manufacturer's specifications (Promega). Sequencing of the 1.4-kb PCR product was performed on both DNA strands at the sequencing facility of Macrogen, Inc., Seoul, South Korea. The sequences were analyzed using BLAST V2.0 software ( http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/ ) and showed 99% identity with the sequences corresponding either to the 16S RNA ribosomal gene of S. infantarius subsp. infantarius (GenBank accession number EU420174 ) or to the 16S RNA ribosomal gene of S. lutetiensis (GenBank accession number NR_037096 ). In order to discriminate subspecies, we amplified the sodA gene (coding for the manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase) following the methodology described by Poyart et al. ( 4 , 5 ). A PCR product of 404 bp was obtained using the primers described by those authors ( 4 , 5 ). Sequence analysis revealed 100% identity with the sodA sequence of Streptococcus lutetiensis (GenBank accession number AY035713 ). These results confirmed the species identification. Several different methods were used to arrive at definitive identification because routine phenotypic methods (conventional biochemical tests and automated methods) and 16S rRNA gene sequencing cannot differentiate S. lutetiensis from S. infantarius . 

Disk diffusion was performed following CLSI guidelines ( 6 ). Furthermore, susceptibility to 7 antimicrobial agents was determined by the Etest technique (bioMérieux) on Mueller-Hinton agar with 5% sheep blood following the manufacturer's specifications. The MIC breakpoints used in this study were those established by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) in 2012 ( 6 ) for the Streptococcus subsp. viridans group. The MICs (in μg/ml) for S. lutetiensis isolate were as follows: for penicillin, 0.032; for ceftriaxone, 0.023; for vancomycin, 0.38; for ciprofloxacin, 0.75; for erythromycin, 0.064; for clindamycin, 2.0; and for lincomycin, 128. 

The phenotypic characterization was complemented by a modified triple-disk induction test as previously described ( 7 ). In the test, lincomycin and clindamycin disks were placed 15 mm apart at the sides of an erythromycin disk. No inhibition zones were observed around clindamycin and lincomycin disks; no inducible pattern was detected. 

To determine the lincosamide resistance mechanism (L-phenotype: erythromycin susceptible but clindamycin resistant), detection of the lnuB gene, encoding the lincosamide nucleotidyl-transferase enzyme, was performed. The presence of the lnuB gene was detected using primers that have been previously described ( 8 ) and was confirmed by sequencing. The nucleotide sequence was deposited in the EMBL/GenBank/DDBJ databases under accession number KC688833 . The isolate was also tested for ermB , ermTR , lnuB , and mefA / mefE with negative results. 

Given the clinical picture of cholangitis (fever and epigastric and right flank pain), and with the preliminary report of Streptococcus infantarius with Escherichia coli isolation in blood cultures, treatment with ampicillin-sulbactam at 3.0 g/6 h administered intravenously (i.v.) plus ciprofloxacin at 400 mg/12 h administered i.v. was started. 

After the antibiotic susceptibility report for both microorganisms was received, ciprofloxacin was discontinued. 

After 3 days of treatment with this antimicrobial agent, the patient was afebrile and recovered well. He was discharged on ertapenem at 1 g/day administered i.v. for 15 days. 

In the nineties, and after several different proposals, the members of the Streptococcus bovis / S. equinus group were reclassified based on their phenotypic and genotypic differences from Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus ( 9 ), formerly S. bovis biotype I; Streptococcus lutetiensis , previously known as Streptococcus infantarius subsp. coli ( 4 ), which in turn corresponds to S. bovis biotype II/1; and finally, Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. pasteurianus (formerly S. bovis biotype II/2) ( 4 ). Species from this group are frequently encountered in blood cultures of patients with bacteremia, sepsis, and endocarditis. The clinical significance of S. bovis group growing in blood culture is based on the association of S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus with gastrointestinal disorders, including colon cancer and chronic liver disease, and of S. gallolyticus subsp. pasteurianus with meningitis and with hepatobiliary infections (although not with colorectal neoplasias) ( 1 , 10 – 12 ). 

Other species that are also part of this group but less related to human infections are Streptococcus equinus , Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. macedonicus , Streptococcus infantarius subsp. infantarius , and Streptococcus alactolyticus ( 13 ). 

In regard to S. bovis group antibiotic susceptibility, resistance to erythromycin and to clindamycin in this group has previously been described by Rodríguez-Avial et al. ( 14 ). In their study, of a total of 18 isolates, 78% were resistant to erythromycin and 72% were resistant to clindamycin. Among their isolates, the cMLS B (constitutive MLS B ) phenotype (where “MLS B ” represents “macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin B”) was predominant, and in all of them, the ermB gene was detected; the iMLS B (inducible MLS B ) phenotype was detected in only one erythromycin-resistant isolate. Additionally, differences in the rates of resistance to erythromycin and clindamycin were observed among the different subspecies of Streptococcus gallolyticus , S. infantarius subsp. infantarius , and Streptococcus lutetiensis in a study by Romero et al. ( 15 ). The highest percentage of resistance was obtained for S. lutetiensis (60% resistant to erythromycin and to clindamycin; MIC 50 > 2 μg/ml) ( 15 ). These results differ from those reported by Beck et al. ( 1 ). In their work, 94% of the isolates of S. lutetiensis tested were susceptible to erythromycin (MIC 90 , 0.12 μg/ml) whereas clindamycin susceptibility was not reported ( 1 ). The highest percentages of erythromycin resistance were observed for S. gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus isolates (MIC 90 > 32 μg/ml) and for S. gallolyticus subsp. pasteurianus isolates (MIC 90 > 32 μg/ml); however, no erythromycin resistance mechanism was recorded by those authors ( 1 ). In our work, the S. lutetiensis isolate was PCR positive only for the lnuB gene, representing the first description of this gene within this species. Among streptococci, the lnuB gene was also described in Streptococcus agalactiae ( 16 , 17 ) and Streptococcus dysgalactiae subsp. equisimilis and in Streptococcus uberis ( 18 , 19 ). 

The difficulty in differentiating Streptococcus infantarius subspecies using conventional biochemical tests has been reported by other authors. Beck et al. ( 1 ) found that some features of S. infantarius subsp. coli (now S. lutetiensis ) (among 17 isolates studied) were different from the data given by Schlegel et al. ( 13 , 20 ), especially regarding hydrolysis of esculin and acidity from glycogen, trehalose, and starch. These different characteristics, together with other results from the largest number of S. infantarius subsp. coli strains to be published, allowed Beck et al. to create an amended species description for S. infantarius subsp. coli ( 1 ). Also, the limitations of the 16S RNA sequencing performed to identify members of Streptococcus bovis group have been indicated by Poyart et al. ( 4 ). Those authors pointed out that the 16S rRNA gene sequences of strains from S. infantarius sp. coli were almost identical to those of the type strains of S. bovis (99% ± 9%) and S. infantarius (99% ± 9%). To differentiate such strains, those authors proposed the use of an alternative single-copy target sequence which exhibits greater sequence divergence than that of 16S rRNA gene: the sodA gene of the Gram-positive cocci, which encodes the manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD), allows differentiating closely related species belonging to the Streptococcus and Enterococcus genera ( 4 , 5 ). 

In conclusion, we describe the first case of an S. lutetiensis isolate harboring the lnuB gene, highlighting that monitoring antibiotic resistance in members of the S. bovis group is necessary not only to detect new resistance mechanisms but also in cases in which clindamycin could be a therapeutic option. 

Nucleotide sequence accession numbers. 

The obtained sequences for the Streptococcus lutetiensis sodA and lnuB genes have been deposited at GenBank under accession numbers KC714048 and KC688833 , respectively. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work was supported by grants from the Secretaría de Ciencia y Técnica de la Universidad de Buenos Aires (UBACyT) to C.V. and M.M. M.S.R., L.B., and M.M. are members of the CONICET research career. 

Footnotes 

Published ahead of print 18 September 2013 

REFERENCES 

1. Beck M, Frodl R, Funke G.
2008. 
Comprehensive study of strains previously designated Streptococcus bovis consecutively isolated from human blood cultures and emended description of Streptococcus gallolyticus and Streptococcus infantarius subsp. coli. J. Clin. Microbiol.
46:2966–2972 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

2. Carbonnelle E, Mesquita C, Bille E, Day N, Dauphin B, Beretti JL, Ferroni A, Gutmann L, Nassif X.
2011. 
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry tools for bacterial identification in clinical microbiology laboratory. Clin. Biochem.
44:104–109 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

3. Weisburg WG, Barns SM, Pelletier DA, Lane LD.
1991. 
16S ribosomal DNA amplification for phylogenetic study. J. Bacteriol.
173:697–703 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

4. Poyart C, Quesne G, Trieu-Cuot P.
2002. 
Taxonomic dissection of the Streptococcus bovis group by analysis of manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase gene (sodA) sequences: reclassification of ‘Streptococcus infantarius subsp. coli' as Streptococcus lutetiensis sp. nov. and of Streptococcus bovis biotype II.2 as Streptococcus pasteurianus. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.
52(Pt 4):1247–1255 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

5. Poyart C, Quesne G, Coulon S, Berche P, Trieu-Cuot P.
1998. 
Identification of streptococci to species level by sequencing the gene encoding the manganese-dependent superoxide dismutase. J. Clin. Microbiol.
36:41–47 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

6. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute
2012. 
Performance standards for antimicrobial susceptibility testing; M100-S22, 22th informational supplement
Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute, Wayne, PA [ Google Scholar ] 

7. Jenssen WD, Thakker-Varia S, Dubin DT, Weinstein MP.
1987. 
Prevalence of macrolides-lincosamides-streptogramin B resistance and erm gene classes among clinical strains of staphylococci and streptococci. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
31:883–888 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

8. Bozdogan B, Berrezouga L, Kuo MS, Yurek DA, Farley KA, Stockman BJ, Leclercq R.
1999. 
A new resistance gene, linB, conferring resistance to lincosamides by nucleotidylation in Enterococcus faecium HM1025. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
43:925–929 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

9. Farrow JAE, Kruze J, Phillips BA, Bramley AJ, Collins MD.
1984. 
Taxonomic studies on Streptococcus bovis and Streptococcus equinus: description of Streptococcus galactolyticus sp. nov. and Streptococcus saccharolyticus sp. nov. Syst. Appl. Microbiol.
5:467–482 [ Google Scholar ] 

10. Gavin PJ, Thomson RB, Jr, Horng SJ, Yogev R.
2003. 
Neonatal sepsis caused by Streptococcus bovis variant (biotype II/2): report of a case and review. J. Clin. Microbiol.
41:3433–3435 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

11. Klein RS, Recco RA, Catalano MT, Edberg SC, Casey JI, Steigbigel NH.
1977. 
Association of Streptococcus bovis with carcinoma of the colon. N. Engl. J. Med.
297:800–802 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

12. Pergola V, Di Salvo G, Habib G, Avierinos JF, Philip E, Vailloud JM, Thuny F, Casalta JP, Ambrosi P, Lambert M, Riberi A, Ferracci A, Mesana T, Metras D, Harle JR, Weiller PJ, Raoult D, Luccioni R.
2001. 
Comparison of clinical and echocardiographic characteristics of Streptococcus bovis endocarditis with that caused by other pathogens. Am. J. Cardiol.
88:871–875 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

13. Schlegel L, Grimont F, Ageron E, Grimont PAD, Bouvet A.
2003. 
Reappraisal of the taxonomy of the Streptococcus bovis/Streptococcus equinus complex and related species: description of Streptococcus gallolyticus subsp. gallolyticus subsp. nov., S. gallolyticus subsp. macedonicus subsp. nov. and S. gallolyticus subsp. pasteurianus subsp. nov. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.
53(Pt 3):631–645 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

14. Rodríguez-Avial I, Rodríguez-Avial C, Culebras E, Picazo JJ.
2005. 
In vitro activity of telithromycin against viridans group streptococci and Streptococcus bovis isolated from blood: antimicrobial susceptibility patterns in different groups of species. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
49:820–823 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

15. Romero B, Morosini MI, Loza E, Rodríguez-Baños M, Navas E, Cantón R, Campo RD.
2011. 
Reidentification of Streptococcus bovis isolates causing bacteremia according to the new taxonomy criteria: still an issue?
J. Clin. Microbiol.
49:3228–3233 [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

16. Corrêa AB, Silva LG, Pinto Tde C, Oliveira IC, Fernandes FG, Costa NS, Mattos MC, Fracalanzza SE, Benchetrit LC.
2011. 
The genetic diversity and phenotypic characterisation of Streptococcus agalactiae isolates from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Mem. Inst. Oswaldo Cruz
106:1002–1006 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

17. Faccone D, Lalonardi F, Abel S, Machain M, Errecalde L, Littvik A, Kauffman S, Galas M, WHONET-Argentina Group. Corso A.
2010. 
Multiple-clones of Streptococcus agalactiae harbouring lnuB gene. J. Infect. Dev. Ctries.
4:580–582 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

18. Schmitt-Van de Leemput E, Zadoks RN.
2007. 
Genotypic and phenotypic detection of macrolide and lincosamide resistance in Streptococcus uberis. J. Dairy Sci.
90:5089–5096 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

19. Lüthje P, Schwarz S.
2007. 
Molecular basis of resistance to macrolides and lincosamides among staphylococci and streptococci from various animal sources collected in the resistance monitoring program BfT-GermVet. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents
29:528–535 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

20. Schlegel L, Grimont F, Collins MD, Regnault B, Grimont PAD, Bouvet A.
2000. 
Streptococcus infantarius sp. nov., Streptococcus infantarius subsp. infantarius subsp. nov. and Streptococcus infantarius subsp. coli subsp. nov., isolated from humans and food. Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol.
50(Pt 4):1425–1434 [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

Articles from Journal of Clinical Microbiology are provided here courtesy of American Society for Microbiology (ASM) 

ACTIONS 

View on publisher site 

PDF (115.2 KB) 

Cite 

Collections 

Permalink 

PERMALINK 

Copy 

RESOURCES 

Similar articles 

Cited by other articles 

Links to NCBI Databases 

Cite 

Copy 

Download .nbib .nbib 

Format: AMA APA MLA NLM 

Add to Collections 

Create a new collection 

Add to an existing collection 

Name your collection * 

Choose a collection 
Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again 

Add Cancel 

Follow NCBI 

NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) NCBI on Facebook NCBI on LinkedIn NCBI on GitHub NCBI RSS feed 

Connect with NLM 

NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) NLM on Facebook NLM on YouTube 

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 

Web Policies 

FOIA 

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure 

Help 

Accessibility 

Careers 

NLM 

NIH 

HHS 

USA.gov 

Back to Top
