PMID: 25779568
PMCID: PMC4432141
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.04576-14
Title: Longitudinal study of extended-spectrum-β-lactamase- and AmpC-producing Enterobacteriaceae in household dogs.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2015
Authors: Baede VO, Wagenaar JA, Broens EM, Duim B, Dohmen W, Nijsse R, Timmerman AJ, Hordijk J
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
A longitudinal study was performed to (i) investigate the continuity of shedding of extended-spectrum-beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Enterobacteriaceae in dogs without clinical signs, (ii) identify dominant plasmid-mediated ESBL genes, and (iii) quantify ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae in feces. Fecal samples from 38 dogs were collected monthly for 6 months. Additional samples were collected from 7 included dogs on a weekly basis for 6 weeks. Numbers of CFU per gram of feces for non-wild-type Enterobacteriaceae were determined by using MacConkey agar supplemented with 1 mg/liter cefotaxime (MCC), and those for total Enterobacteriaceae were determined by using MacConkey agar. Cefotaxime-resistant isolates were screened by PCR and sequence analysis for the presence of bla CTX-M , bla CMY , bla SHV , bla OXA , and bla TEM gene families. Bacterial species were identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization–time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) analysis. PCR-negative isolates were tested by a double-disk synergy test for enhanced AmpC expression. A total of 259 samples were screened, and 126 samples were culture positive on MCC, resulting in 352 isolates, 327 of which were Escherichia coli . Nine dogs were continuously positive during this study, and 6 dogs were continuously negative. Monthly or weekly shifts in fecal shedding were observed for 23 dogs. Genotyping showed a large variety of ESBL genes and gene combinations at single and multiple consecutive sampling moments. The ESBL genes bla CTX-M-1 , bla CTX-M-14 , bla CTX-M-15 , bla SHV-12 , and bla CMY-2 were most frequently found. The mean number of CFU of non-wild-type Enterobacteriaceae was 6.11 × 10 8 CFU/g feces. This study showed an abundance of ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae in dogs in the Netherlands, mostly in high concentrations. Fecal shedding was shown to be highly dynamic over time, which is important to consider when studying ESBL epidemiology.
