PMID: 26409063
PMCID: PMC4690483
DOI: 10.1093/cid/civ837
Title: Rapid Molecular Diagnostics, Antibiotic Treatment Decisions, and Developing Approaches to Inform Empiric Therapy: PRIMERS I and II.
Journal: Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America
PubDate: 2016 Jan 15
Authors: Evans SR, Hujer AM, Jiang H, Hujer KM, Hall T, Marzan C, Jacobs MR, Sampath R, Ecker DJ, Manca C, Chavda K, Zhang P, Fernandez H, Chen L, Mediavilla JR, Hill CB, Perez F, Caliendo AM, Fowler VG Jr, Chambers HF, Kreiswirth BN, Bonomo RA, Antibacterial Resistance Leadership Group
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Rapid molecular diagnostics (RMDs) can guide the correct β-lactam therapy choice when the prevalence of resistance is known. When an RMD reveals that an isolate of Escherichia coli or Klebsiella pneumoniae is susceptible, the result is likely to be accurate. Background. Rapid molecular diagnostic (RMD) platforms may lead to better antibiotic use. Our objective was to develop analytical strategies to enhance the interpretation of RMDs for clinicians. Methods. We compared the performance characteristics of 4 RMD platforms for detecting resistance against β-lactams in 72 highly resistant isolates of Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae (PRIMERS I). Subsequently, 2 platforms were used in a blinded study in which a heterogeneous collection of 196 isolates of E. coli and K. pneumoniae (PRIMERS II) were examined. We evaluated the genotypic results as predictors of resistance or susceptibility against β-lactam antibiotics. We designed analytical strategies and graphical representations of platform performance, including discrimination summary plots and susceptibility and resistance predictive values, that are readily interpretable by practitioners to inform decision-making. Results. In PRIMERS I, the 4 RMD platforms detected β-lactamase ( bla ) genes and identified susceptibility or resistance in >95% of cases. In PRIMERS II, the 2 platforms identified susceptibility against extended-spectrum cephalosporins and carbapenems in >90% of cases; however, against piperacillin/tazobactam, susceptibility was identified in <80% of cases. Applying the analytical strategies to a population with 15% prevalence of ceftazidime-resistance and 5% imipenem-resistance, RMD platforms predicted susceptibility in >95% of cases, while prediction of resistance was 69%–73% for ceftazidime and 41%–50% for imipenem. Conclusions. RMD platforms can help inform empiric β-lactam therapy in cases where bla genes are not detected and the prevalence of resistance is known. Our analysis is a first step in bridging the gap between RMDs and empiric treatment decisions.
