PMID: 27630841
PMCID: PMC5020279
DOI: 10.7860/JCDR/2016/17677.8153
Title: GyrA ser83 and ParC trp106 Mutations in Salmonella enterica Serovar Typhi Isolated from Typhoid Fever Patients in Tertiary Care Hospital.
Journal: Journal of clinical and diagnostic research : JCDR
PubDate: 2016 Jul
Authors: Gopal M, Elumalai S, Arumugam S, Durairajpandian V, Kannan MA, Selvam E, Seetharaman S
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Introduction Typhoid fever is endemic in India and other developing countries, causing major public health problems with high morbidity and mortality. The resistance of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi ( S . Typhi) towards commonly prescribed antimicrobials is increasing in developing countries. However, there have been several reports of the therapeutic failure of fluoroquinolones in patients with Salmonella infection. Resistance to quinolones/ fluoroquinolones commonly arises due to target site mutation. Aim The present study was planned to analyze mutation in Quinolone Resistance Determining Region (QRDR) of quinolone resistant Salmonella isolates. Materials and Methods A total of 133 S. Typhi isolates (blood (n = 131), stool (n=1) and bone marrow aspirate (n=1)) from tertiary care hospitals in Chennai and Puducherry, were included in this study. Minimum Inhibitory Concentrations (MIC) were carried out according to the Clinical Laboratory Standard Institute (CLSI)guidelines 2014. Mutations in gyrA and parC genes were analyzed by PCR-RFLP (Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism) method followed by DNA sequencing. Results Of the 133 S. Typhi, 99.2% were resistant to nalidixic acid and 21% were resistant to ciprofloxacin by MIC method. 94% of isolates showed Ser 83 mutation in gyrA and 21.8% of isolates showed Trp106-Gly mutation in parC . Conclusion Mutations in gyrA and parC genes are highly prevalent among Salmonella species. Irrational use of fluoroquinolones may increase the accumulation of mutations in the DNA gyrase and topoisomerase encoding genes, which lead to the emergence of high level fluoroquinolone-resistant Salmonella strains in future.
