PMID: 2783689
PMCID: PMC209588
DOI: 10.1128/jb.171.1.308-313.1989
Title: Susceptibility of Rhodobacter sphaeroides to beta-lactam antibiotics: isolation and characterization of a periplasmic beta-lactamase (cephalosporinase).
Journal: Journal of bacteriology
PubDate: 1989 Jan
Authors: Baumann M, Simon H, Schneider KH, Danneel HJ, Küster U, Giffhorn F
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Thirteen strains of the gram-negative, facultative phototrophic bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides were examined fro susceptibility to beta-lactam antibiotics. All strains were sensitive to the semisynthetic penicillins ampicillin, carbenicillin, oxacillin, cloxacillin, and methicillin, but 10 of the 13 strains were resistant to penicillin G, as well as a number of cephalosporins, such as cephalothin, cephapirin, and cephalosporin C. A beta-lactamase (EC 3.5.2.6) with strong cephalosporinase activity was detected in all of the resistant strains of R. sphaeroides. With strain Y-1 as a model, it was shown that the beta-lactamase was inducible by penicillin G, cephalosporin C, cephalothin, and to some minor extent, cephapirin. The beta-lactamase was located in the periplasmic space, from which it could be extracted by osmotic shock disruption. By using this fraction, the beta-lactamase was purified 34-fold to homogeneity by steps involving batch adsorption to and elution from DEAE-Sephadex A50, chromatography on Q-Sepharose, and preparative polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The molecular masses of the native and denatured enzymes were determined to be 38.5 kilodaltons by gel filtration and 40.5 kilodaltons by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis, respectively, indicating a monomeric structure. The isoelectric point was estimated to be at pH 4.3. In Tris hydrochloride buffer, optimum enzyme activity was measured at pH 8.5. The beta-lactamase showed high activity in the presence of the substrates cephalothin, cephapirin, cephalosporin C, and penicillin G, for which the apparent Km values were 144, 100, 65, and 110 microM, respectively. Cephalexin, cepharidine, and cephaloridine were poor substrates. The beta-lactamase was strongly inhibited by cloxacillin and oxacillin but only slightly inhibited by phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride or thiol reagents such as iodoacetate and p-chloromercuribenzoate. Images
