PMID: 28507116
PMCID: PMC5527617
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00585-17
Title: Toxic Electrophiles Induce Expression of the Multidrug Efflux Pump MexEF-OprN in Pseudomonas aeruginosa through a Novel Transcriptional Regulator, CmrA.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2017 Aug
Authors: Juarez P, Jeannot K, Plésiat P, Llanes C
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
ABSTRACT The multidrug efflux system MexEF-OprN is produced at low levels in wild-type strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa . However, in so-called nfxC mutants, mutational alteration of the gene mexS results in constitutive overexpression of the pump, along with increased resistance of the bacterium to chloramphenicol, fluoroquinolones, and trimethoprim. In this study, analysis of in vitro -selected chloramphenicol-resistant clones of strain PA14 led to the identification of a new class of MexEF-OprN-overproducing mutants (called nfxC2 ) exhibiting alterations in an as-yet-uncharacterized gene, PA14_38040 (homolog of PA2047 in strain PAO1). This gene is predicted to encode an AraC-like transcriptional regulator and was called cmrA (for c hlora m phenicol r esistance a ctivator). In nfxC2 mutants, the mutated CmrA increases its proper gene expression and upregulates the operon mexEF-oprN through MexS and MexT, resulting in a multidrug resistance phenotype without significant loss in bacterial virulence. Transcriptomic experiments demonstrated that CmrA positively regulates a small set of 11 genes, including PA14_38020 (homolog of PA2048), which is required for the MexS/T-dependent activation of mexEF-oprN . PA2048 codes for a protein sharing conserved domains with the quinol monooxygenase YgiN from Escherichia coli . Interestingly, exposure of strain PA14 to toxic electrophilic molecules (glyoxal, methylglyoxal, and cinnamaldehyde) strongly activates the CmrA pathway and upregulates MexEF-OprN and, thus, increases the resistance of P. aeruginosa to the pump substrates. A picture emerges in which MexEF-OprN is central in the response of the pathogen to stresses affecting intracellular redox homeostasis.
