PMID: 30397053
PMCID: PMC6325193
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.01817-18
Title: Characterization of the First OXA-10 Natural Variant with Increased Carbapenemase Activity.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2019 Jan
Authors: Kotsakis SD, Flach CF, Razavi M, Larsson DGJ
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
While carbapenem resistance in Gram-negative bacteria is mainly due to the production of efficient carbapenemases, β-lactamases with a narrower spectrum may also contribute to resistance when combined with additional mechanisms. OXA-10-type class D β-lactamases, previously shown to be weak carbapenemases, could represent such a case. ABSTRACT While carbapenem resistance in Gram-negative bacteria is mainly due to the production of efficient carbapenemases, β-lactamases with a narrower spectrum may also contribute to resistance when combined with additional mechanisms. OXA-10-type class D β-lactamases, previously shown to be weak carbapenemases, could represent such a case. In this study, two novel OXA-10 variants were identified as the sole carbapenem-hydrolyzing enzymes in meropenem-resistant enterobacteria isolated from hospital wastewater and found by next-generation sequencing to express additional β-lactam resistance mechanisms. The new variants, OXA-655 and OXA-656, were carried by two related IncQ1 broad-host-range plasmids. Compared to the sequence of OXA-10, they both harbored a Thr26Met substitution, with OXA-655 also bearing a leucine instead of a valine in position 117 of the SAV catalytic motif. Susceptibility profiling of laboratory strains replicating the natural bla OXA plasmids and of recombinant clones expressing OXA-10 and the novel variants in an isogenic background indicated that OXA-655 is a more efficient carbapenemase. The carbapenemase activity of OXA-655 is due to the Val117Leu substitution, as shown by steady-state kinetic experiments, where the k cat of meropenem hydrolysis was increased 4-fold. In contrast, OXA-655 had no activity toward oxyimino-β-lactams, while its catalytic efficiency against oxacillin was significantly reduced. Moreover, the Val117Leu variant was more efficient against temocillin and cefoxitin. Molecular dynamics indicated that Val117Leu affects the position 117-Leu155 interaction, leading to structural shifts in the active site that may alter carbapenem alignment. The evolutionary potential of OXA-10 enzymes toward carbapenem hydrolysis combined with their spread by promiscuous plasmids indicates that they may pose a future clinical threat.
