PMID: 32122903
PMCID: PMC7179620
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00160-20
Title: The Novel Macrolide Resistance Genes mef(D), msr(F), and msr(H) Are Present on Resistance Islands in Macrococcus canis, Macrococcus caseolyticus, and Staphylococcus aureus.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2020 Apr 21
Authors: Schwendener S, Donà V, Perreten V
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Chromosomal resistance islands containing the methicillin resistance gene mecD (McRI mecD ) have been reported in Macrococcus caseolyticus . Here, we identified novel macrolide resistance genes in Macrococcus canis on similar elements, called McRI msr . These elements were also integrated into the 3′ end of the 30S ribosomal protein S9 gene ( rpsI ), delimited by characteristic attachment ( att ) sites, and carried a related site-specific integrase gene ( int ) at the 5′ end. ABSTRACT Chromosomal resistance islands containing the methicillin resistance gene mecD (McRI mecD ) have been reported in Macrococcus caseolyticus . Here, we identified novel macrolide resistance genes in Macrococcus canis on similar elements, called McRI msr . These elements were also integrated into the 3′ end of the 30S ribosomal protein S9 gene ( rpsI ), delimited by characteristic attachment ( att ) sites, and carried a related site-specific integrase gene ( int ) at the 5′ end. They carried novel macrolide resistance genes belonging to the msr family of ABC subfamily F (ABC-F)-type ribosomal protection protein [ msr (F) and msr (H)] and the macrolide efflux mef family [ mef (D)]. Highly related mef (D)- msr (F) fragments were found on diverse McRI msr elements in M. canis , M. caseolyticus, and Staphylococcus aureus . Another McRI msr -like element identified in an M. canis strain lacked the classical att site at the 3′ end and carried the msr (H) gene but no neighboring mef gene. The expression of the novel resistance genes in S. aureus resulted in a low-to-moderate increase in the MIC of erythromycin but not streptogramin B. In the mef (D)- msr (F) operon, the msr (F) gene was shown to be the crucial determinant for macrolide resistance. The detection of circular forms of McRI msr and the mef (D)- msr (F) fragment suggested mobility of both the island and the resistance gene subunit. The discovery of McRI msr in different Macrococcus species and S. aureus indicates that these islands have a potential for dissemination of antibiotic resistance within the Staphylococcaceae family.
