PMID: 32284385
PMCID: PMC7318035
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02293-19
Title: A Genotype-Phenotype Correlation Study of SHV β-Lactamases Offers New Insight into SHV Resistance Profiles.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2020 Jun 23
Authors: Neubauer S, Madzgalla S, Marquet M, Klabunde A, Büttner B, Göhring A, Brandt C, Feller KH, Pletz MW, Makarewicz O
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
The SHV β-lactamases (BLs) have undergone strong allele diversification that has changed their substrate specificities. Based on 147 NCBI entries for SHV alleles, in silico mathematical models predicted 5 positions as relevant for the β-lactamase inhibitor (BLI)-resistant (2br) phenotype, 12 positions as relevant for the extended-spectrum BL (ESBL) (2be) phenotype, and 2 positions as related solely to the narrow-spectrum (2b) phenotype. These positions and six additional positions described in other studies (including one promoter mutation) were systematically substituted and investigated for their substrate specificities in a BL-free Escherichia coli background, representing, to our knowledge, the most comprehensive substrate and substitution analysis for SHV alleles to date. ABSTRACT The SHV β-lactamases (BLs) have undergone strong allele diversification that has changed their substrate specificities. Based on 147 NCBI entries for SHV alleles, in silico mathematical models predicted 5 positions as relevant for the β-lactamase inhibitor (BLI)-resistant (2br) phenotype, 12 positions as relevant for the extended-spectrum BL (ESBL) (2be) phenotype, and 2 positions as related solely to the narrow-spectrum (2b) phenotype. These positions and six additional positions described in other studies (including one promoter mutation) were systematically substituted and investigated for their substrate specificities in a BL-free Escherichia coli background, representing, to our knowledge, the most comprehensive substrate and substitution analysis for SHV alleles to date. An in vitro analysis confirmed the essentiality of positions 238 and 179 for the 2be phenotype and of position 69 for the 2br phenotype. The E240K and E240R substitutions, which do not occur alone in known 2br SHV variants, led to a 2br phenotype, indicating a latent BLI resistance potential of these substitutions. The M129V, A234G, S271I, and R292Q substitutions conferred latent resistance to cefotaxime. In addition, seven positions that were found not always to be associated with the ESBL phenotype resulted in increased resistance to ceftaroline. We also observed that coupling of a strong promoter (IS 26 ) to an A146V mutant with the 2b phenotype resulted in highly increased resistance to BLIs, cefepime, and ceftaroline but not to third-generation cephalosporins, indicating that SHV enzymes represent an underestimated risk for empirical therapies that use piperacillin-tazobactam or cefepime to treat different infectious diseases caused by Gram-negative bacteria.
