PMID: 32660986
PMCID: PMC7449155
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00879-20
Title: Pharmacodynamic Evaluation of Plasma and Epithelial Lining Fluid Exposures of Amikacin against Pseudomonas aeruginosa in a Dynamic In Vitro Hollow-Fiber Infection Model.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2020 Aug 20
Authors: Heffernan AJ, Sime FB, Sarovich DS, Neely M, Guerra-Valero Y, Naicker S, Cottrell K, Harris P, Andrews KT, Ellwood D, Wallis SC, Lipman J, Grimwood K, Roberts JA
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Given that aminoglycosides, such as amikacin, may be used for multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections, optimization of therapy is paramount for improved treatment outcomes. This study aims to investigate the pharmacodynamics of different simulated intravenous amikacin doses on susceptible P. aeruginosa to inform ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) and sepsis treatment choices. A hollow-fiber infection model with two P. aeruginosa isolates (MICs of 2 and 8 mg/liter) with an initial inoculum of ∼10 8 CFU/ml was used to test different amikacin dosing regimens. ABSTRACT Given that aminoglycosides, such as amikacin, may be used for multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections, optimization of therapy is paramount for improved treatment outcomes. This study aims to investigate the pharmacodynamics of different simulated intravenous amikacin doses on susceptible P. aeruginosa to inform ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) and sepsis treatment choices. A hollow-fiber infection model with two P. aeruginosa isolates (MICs of 2 and 8 mg/liter) with an initial inoculum of ∼10 8 CFU/ml was used to test different amikacin dosing regimens. Three regimens (15, 25, and 50 mg/kg) were tested to simulate a blood exposure, while a 30 mg/kg regimen simulated the epithelial lining fluid (ELF) for potential respiratory tract infection. Data were described using a semimechanistic pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) model. Whole-genome sequencing was used to identify mutations associated with resistance emergence. While bacterial density was reduced by >6 logs within the first 12 h in simulated blood exposures following this initial bacterial kill, there was amplification of a resistant subpopulation with ribosomal mutations that were likely mediating amikacin resistance. No appreciable bacterial killing occurred with subsequent doses. There was less (<5 log) bacterial killing in the simulated ELF exposure for either isolate tested. Simulation studies suggested that a dose of 30 and 50 mg/kg may provide maximal bacterial killing for bloodstream and VAP infections, respectively. Our results suggest that amikacin efficacy may be improved with the use of high-dose therapy to rapidly eliminate susceptible bacteria. Subsequent doses may have reduced efficacy given the rapid amplification of less-susceptible bacterial subpopulations with amikacin monotherapy.
