PMID: 34151961
PMCID: PMC8633438
DOI: 10.1093/jac/dkab201
Title: PBP4-mediated β-lactam resistance among clinical strains of Staphylococcus aureus.
Journal: The Journal of antimicrobial chemotherapy
PubDate: 2021 Aug 12
Authors: Satishkumar N, Alexander JAN, Poon R, Buggeln E, Argudín MA, Strynadka NCJ, Chatterjee SS
Source: OA_HTML
License: pmc_html_oa

## OA_HTML
PBP4-mediated β-lactam resistance among clinical strains of Staphylococcus aureus - PMC 
Skip to main content 

An official website of the United States government 
Here's how you know 
Here's how you know 

Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official
 government organization in the United States. 

Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely
 connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
 information only on official, secure websites. 

Search 
Log in 

Dashboard 

Publications 

Account settings 

Log out 

Search… Search NCBI 

Primary site navigation 
Search 

Logged in as: 

Dashboard 

Publications 

Account settings 

Log in 

Search PMC Full-Text Archive Search in PMC 

Journal List 

User Guide 

PERMALINK 

Copy 

As a library, NLM provides access to scientific literature. Inclusion in an NLM database does not imply endorsement of, or agreement with,
 the contents by NLM or the National Institutes of Health. Learn more: PMC Disclaimer | PMC Copyright Notice 

J Antimicrob Chemother 
. 2021 Jun 21;76(9):2268–2272. doi: 10.1093/jac/dkab201 

Search in PMC 

Search in PubMed 

View in NLM Catalog 

Add to search 

PBP4-mediated β-lactam resistance among clinical strains of Staphylococcus aureus 

Nidhi Satishkumar 

Nidhi Satishkumar 

1 Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, School of Dentistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA 

2 Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology, Baltimore, MD, USA 

Find articles by Nidhi Satishkumar 

1, 2, 2 , J Andrew N Alexander 

J Andrew N Alexander 

3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Centre for Blood Research, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 

Find articles by J Andrew N Alexander 

3, 2 , Raymond Poon 

Raymond Poon 

1 Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, School of Dentistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA 

2 Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology, Baltimore, MD, USA 

Find articles by Raymond Poon 

1, 2 , Emma Buggeln 

Emma Buggeln 

4 Division of HIV/AIDS, Infectious Diseases and Global Health, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, CA, USA 

Find articles by Emma Buggeln 

4 , Maria A Argudín 

Maria A Argudín 

5 National Reference Centre for Staphylococcus aureus, Department of Microbiology, Laboratoire Hospitalier Universitaire de Bruxelles Universitair Laboratorium Brussel (LHUB-ULB), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium 

Find articles by Maria A Argudín 

5, 3 , Natalie C J Strynadka 

Natalie C J Strynadka 

3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Centre for Blood Research, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 

Find articles by Natalie C J Strynadka 

3 , Som S Chatterjee 

Som S Chatterjee 

1 Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, School of Dentistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA 

2 Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology, Baltimore, MD, USA 

Find articles by Som S Chatterjee 

1, 2, ✉ 

Author information 

Article notes 

Copyright and License information 

1 Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, School of Dentistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA 

2 Institute of Marine and Environmental Technology, Baltimore, MD, USA 

3 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Centre for Blood Research, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada 

4 Division of HIV/AIDS, Infectious Diseases and Global Health, Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco General Hospital, San Francisco, CA, USA 

5 National Reference Centre for Staphylococcus aureus, Department of Microbiology, Laboratoire Hospitalier Universitaire de Bruxelles Universitair Laboratorium Brussel (LHUB-ULB), Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium 

✉ 
Corresponding author. E-mail: schatterjee@umaryland.edu 

2 
Nidhi Satishkumar and J. Andrew N. Alexander Equal contributor. 

3 
Present address: Molecular Biology Laboratory, Tour R. Franklin, Cliniques Universitaires Saint Luc UCL, Brussels, Belgium. 

Received 2020 Dec 7; Accepted 2021 May 24; Collection date 2021 Sep. 

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com. 

This article is published and distributed under the terms of the Oxford University Press, Standard Journals Publication Model ( https://academic.oup.com/journals/pages/open_access/funder_policies/chorus/standard_publication_model ) 

PMC Copyright notice 

PMCID: PMC8633438  PMID: 34151961 

Abstract 

Background 

PBP4, a low-molecular-weight PBP in Staphylococcus aureus , is not considered to be a classical mediator of β-lactam resistance. Previous studies carried out by our group with laboratory strains of S. aureus demonstrated the ability of PBP4 to produce β-lactam resistance through mutations associated with the pbp4 promoter and/or gene. Recent studies of β-lactam-resistant clinical isolates of S. aureus have reported similar mutations associated with pbp4 . 

Objectives 

To determine if pbp4 -associated mutations reported among clinical strains of S. aureus mediate β-lactam resistance. 

Methods 

The pbp4 promoters and genes bearing mutations from clinical isolates were cloned into a heterologous host. Reporter, growth and Bocillin assays were performed to assess their role in β-lactam resistance. X-ray crystallography was used to obtain acyl-enzyme intermediate structures of the WT and mutant PBP4 with nafcillin and cefoxitin. 

Results 

Of the five strains that contained pbp4 promoter mutations, three strains exhibited enhanced expression of PBP4. The R200L mutation in pbp4 resulted in increased survival in the presence of the β-lactams nafcillin and cefoxitin. Further, introduction of either a promoter or a gene mutation into the genome of a WT host increased the ability of the strains to resist the action of β-lactams. The four high-resolution X-ray structures presented demonstrate the binding pose of the β-lactams tested and provide hints for further drug development. 

Conclusions 

Mutations associated with the pbp4 promoter and pbp4 gene altered protein activity and mediated β-lactam resistance among the clinically isolated strains that were studied. 

Introduction 

PBPs are enzymes that mediate the final steps of peptidoglycan biosynthesis in bacteria. 1 The peptidoglycan sacculus in bacteria dictates cell morphology and provides essential protection by preventing cell lysis and death. PBPs are the primary targets of the β-lactam class of antibiotics, which are typically well tolerated by patients and widely used in the treatment of bacterial infections. 2 

Staphylococcus aureus causes widespread nosocomial- and community-associated infections. Along with a multifaceted array of virulence factors, S. aureus is also frequently resistant to antibiotics, making these infections difficult to treat and increasing patient mortality. 3 In S. aureus , resistance to β-lactams is classically mediated by PC1 β-lactamase and PBP2a, which are gene products of blaZ and mecA (or its variants, such as mecC ), respectively. 4 PC1 hydrolyses the β-lactam ring of the antibiotic and causes drug inactivation. PBP2a has a reduced acylation rate for β-lactams, helping maintain an intact peptidoglycan sacculus even in the presence of high antibiotic concentrations. Through serial passaging studies, we previously demonstrated the occurrence of high-level β-lactam resistance in strains lacking the classical mediators of β-lactam resistance, which indicated the involvement of non-classical genes. 5 WGS analysis of serially passaged resistant strains revealed mutations associated with pbp4 , suggesting their potential involvement in resistance. 6 Further studies carried out by our group attributed the resistance of these passaged strains to pbp4 promoter mutations and/or gene mutations that caused amino acid changes surrounding its active site. 5 , 7 

We obtained clinical isolates that were part of recent clinical surveillance studies carried out in Belgium and were non-susceptible to β-lactams, such as penicillin, oxacillin and/or cefoxitin. Many of these isolates contained mutations associated with the pbp4 promoter and/or the pbp4 gene. 8 , 9 

In this study, we sought to determine if the mutations associated with pbp4 in the clinical strains played a role in β-lactam resistance. Mutations in the pbp4 promoter were assessed for their activity through reporter assays, while the missense mutations in the pbp4 gene were evaluated by heterologous growth assays in the presence of nafcillin and cefoxitin. Further, to show physiological relevance, mutations that displayed a significant amount of resistance were introduced into the genome of the WT strain, following which growth assays and a Bocillin assay were performed. Additionally, in an effort to further probe these mechanisms of resistance, we collected high-resolution X-ray crystallographic structures of the pbp4 mutant that displayed the highest resistance to these β-lactams. Our data demonstrate that pbp4 -associated mutations can play a clinically significant role in β-lactam resistance of S. aureus . Further, our acyl-enzyme structures of WT and mutant PBP4 provide insights into nafcillin and cefoxitin binding to both versions of PBP4 and provide hints on possible resistance mechanisms. While the clinical strains did contain mutations in other genes as well, 8 we demonstrate that pbp4 mutations can largely contribute to resistance by themselves or in synergy with other mutations. 

Results and discussion 

Clinical S. aureus strains with pbp4-associated mutations 

A total of eight clinical isolates of S. aureus that contained mutations associated with the pbp4 promoter and/or the pbp4 gene were considered for this study. They were designated as strain 1 to strain 8 (Table S1 , available as Supplementary data at JAC Online). Five of these strains contained mutations in the pbp4 promoter (strain 1 to strain 5) and five contained mutations in the pbp4 gene (strains 4 through 8). Strains 4 and 5 contained mutations in both the pbp4 promoter and structural gene (Table S1 ). The selected isolates were resistant to penicillin, oxacillin and/or cefoxitin, as per EUCAST guidelines. 8 

pbp4 promoter mutations lead to enhanced PBP4 expression 

To examine the effect of pbp4 promoter mutations on β-lactam resistance in the clinical isolates, we performed a reporter assay analysis. pbp4 promoters from strain 1 to strain 5 were cloned into a luciferase (lux) reporter plasmid ( pAmilux ) 10 and introduced into a heterologous background strain, COLnex (Table S2 , Table S3 and Table S4 ). A reporter assay was performed for the resultant strains to measure luciferase signals after 4 h of bacterial growth, as carried out previously. 7 The already available reporter strains with pbp4 promoters from COLnex (WT), a resistant passaged strain with hyper-active PBP4 production (CRB) and the empty vector (E) served as controls for our experiments 7 (Table S2 ). pbp4 promoters from strains 1, 2 and 5 produced significantly higher lux signals compared with that of WT (Figure 1 a). Since the lux signal levels were representative of promoter activity, these results indicated that the increased promoter activity seen in strains 1, 2 and 5 was due to the mutations in their respective pbp4 promoters, causing enhanced expression of PBP4. These data, along with the growth and Bocillin assays performed for isogenic strains containing promoter or gene mutations (Figure S1a to d ), demonstrated that pbp4 promoter mutations indeed have the ability to cause β-lactam resistance by enhancing the expression of PBP4. Specific mutations in the pbp4 promoter potentially alter the binding of regulatory proteins, resulting in the overexpression of PBP4. It is possible that different types of mutations cause different degrees of PBP4 overexpression, depending on the extent to which the regulation is altered. Elevated levels of PBP4 can cause increased transpeptidation, resulting in a highly cross-linked peptidoglycan. 5 pbp4 promoter mutations thus play an important role in β-lactam resistance. 

Figure 1. 

Open in a new tab 

Mutations associated with the pbp4 promoter and pbp4 gene lead to β-lactam resistance. (a) Luciferase reporter assay for strains with pbp4 promoter mutations. Promoters from strains 1, 2 and 5 gave significantly higher lux signals ( P = 0.0048, 0.0303 and 0.0361, respectively) compared with the strain with a WT pbp4 promoter. (b) Growth studies of COLnex Δ pbp4 transformed with pTx Δ + pbp4 from strains with missense mutations in the presence of 2 mg/L nafcillin. Cells containing pbp4 from strain 7 (E218K) and strain 8 (R200L) showed enhanced survival compared with cells containing WT pbp4 . WT versus strain 7 at 10 h: P = 0.0036. WT versus strain 8 at 10 h: P = 0.0001. (c) Growth studies of COLnex Δ pbp4 transformed with p Tx Δ + pbp4 from strains with missense mutations in the presence of 3 mg/L cefoxitin. Cells containing pbp4 from strain 8 showed enhanced survival compared with cells containing WT pbp4 . WT versus strain 8 at 10 h: P = 0.0152. 

Missense mutations in pbp4 cause β-lactam resistance 

To determine the role of pbp4 missense mutations in β-lactam resistance, we performed growth assays. We cloned the pbp4 gene from strain 4 to strain 8 into a constitutively expressing plasmid (p TX Δ ) and transformed the plasmid into a heterologous background strain lacking pbp4 (COLnex Δ pbp4) . The already available strains with pbp4 s from COLnex (WT), a previously studied strain with pbp4 containing E183A and F241R mutations producing resistance (CRB) and the empty vector (E) served as controls for our experiments 7 (Table S2 ). We performed growth assays for the resultant strains in the presence and absence of β-lactams. The resultant bacterial strains had no growth differences in normal growth medium [tryptic soy broth (TSB)] (Figure S2a ), suggesting pbp4 mutations did not produce any growth defect in TSB. However, in the presence of 2 mg/L nafcillin, cells of strains 7 and 8, which contained E218K and R200L missense mutations, respectively, had a significant growth advantage compared with cells with WT pbp4 (Figure 1 b). When cultured in the presence of 3 mg/L cefoxitin, we saw that only strain 8 (R200L missense mutation) had a growth advantage (Figure 1 c). Even when introduced into the genome as a single copy through allelic replacement (Table S2 ), the R200L mutation had the ability to impart β-lactam resistance (Figure S1b ). The reason why strain 7 (E218K) was unresponsive to cefoxitin is not clear. 

Since the R200L mutation in strain 8 was also detected in one of our previously reported passaged resistant strains 6 and since it gave the most striking resistance phenotype to nafcillin and cefoxitin (Figure 1 b and c, Figure S1 a and b and Figure S3 a and b), this construct was chosen for further structural studies. We solved the structures of PBP4 R200L in complex with nafcillin and cefoxitin, and without ligand, as well as the structure of previously unavailable WT PBP4 (PBP4 WT ) in complex with cefoxitin for comparison. All structures were solved in the P2 1 2 1 2 1 space group to resolutions of 1.9 to 1.6 Å with excellent statistics and no Ramachandran outliers (Table S5 ). The 2 F o -F c electron density maps and F o -F c simulated annealing omit maps support the modelled positions of the ligands and a covalent link between the γ-O of Ser-75 and the C7 carbon of nafcillin or the C8 carbon of cefoxitin (Figure S4 ). 

Compared with the previously solved PBP4 WT -nafcillin acyl-enzyme intermediate structure (PDB-ID 5ty7), nafcillin bound to PBP4 R200L is rotated in the active site by approximately 30 degrees (Figure 2 a). In both structures, the nafcillin naphthalene R1 moiety appears to have few contacts and is solvent exposed, while the carboxylate bonded to the thiazolidine ring interacts with different residues depending on the rotation of the ligand. See Figure 2 (a and b). 

Figure 2. 

Open in a new tab 

Structures of PBP4 and PBP4 R200L in complex with nafcillin and cefoxitin. (a) An overlay of selected PBP4 (PDB ID 5ty7) and PBP4 R200L active-site residues involved in interactions with nafcillin (shown in light green for the PBP4 WT structure and dark green for the PBP4 R200L structure). PBP4 active-site residues are shown as light grey lines, while those from PBP4 R200L are shown as dark grey lines. Water molecules are shown as cyan spheres. (b) Line diagrams of the modelled acylated nafcillin and of intact nafcillin prior to acylation. (c) Selected overlayed PBP4 and PBP4 R200L active-site residues are shown in complex with cefoxitin (shown in light blue for the PBP4 structure and dark blue for the PBP4 R200L structure). PBP4 active-site residues are shown as light grey lines, while those from PBP4 R200L are shown as dark grey lines. Water molecules are shown as cyan spheres. (d) Line diagrams of intact and modelled cefoxitin are shown, with the carbamoyloxymethyl group that is lost upon acylation in pink. (e) Aligned, ligand-free cartoon structures of PBP4 (PBD ID 6c39) and PBP4 R200L are shown in light grey and dark grey, respectively. The active-site Ser-75 is shown as red sticks, while the residues mutated in strains 7 and 8 are shown as orange sticks. 

As cefoxitin specifically targets PBP4, our PBP4-cefoxitin acyl-enzyme intermediate structures allow insight into future directions for PBP4 inhibitor development and optimization. 11 A main difference between the PBP4-cefoxitin structures presented here and previous PBP4 structures with other β-lactams is the cation-π interaction between the Arg-186 guanidinium cation and the thiophene ring, stabilizing the R1 moiety of the ligand (Figure 2 c). This cation-π interaction provides a possible explanation for why cefoxitin is an effective inhibitor of PBP4. In both cefoxitin structures shown here there is no electron density for the carbamoyloxymethyl moiety bonded to the C3 carbon of the cefoxitin dihydrothiazine ring (Figure 2 d). Intact MS indicates that this moiety is hydrolysed when bound to PBP4 WT or PBP4 R200L as has been observed previously in an Escherichia coli PBP5-cefoxitin co-structure (Figure S5 and Table S6 ). 12 

Overall, the PBP4 WT and PBP4 R200L structures are highly similar and the location of the R200L mutation precludes direct interaction between the mutated residues and β-lactam during acylation (Figure 2 e and Table S7 ). We therefore explored whether differences in thermal stability of PBP4 R200L may be playing a role in meditating resistance. The thermal stabilities of the two proteins were tested in the presence of a range of concentrations of nafcillin and cefoxitin, revealing a slight increase in thermal stability (∼0.8°C for low concentrations of nafcillin and cefoxitin) for PBP4 R200L compared with PBP4 (Figure S6 ). It has previously been shown that elevated levels of PBP4 can facilitate β-lactam resistance, so the PBP4 R200L mutation could play a role in increasing the amount of PBP4 present through greater stability. 13 Finally, we note that previous research using NMR-spectroscopy-guided molecular docking of native peptidoglycan substrate to PBP4 found that movement of the Arg-200 side chain was needed to facilitate docking of the peptidoglycan substrate. 14 The growth and Bocillin assays for COLnex pbp4 (R200L) showed that while it was resistant to nafcillin and cefoxitin, there was no change in the level of PBP4 detected by the binding of Bocillin, as compared with the WT (Figure S1d ). When taken together, it is possible that the R200L mutation may influence substrate binding, which could possibly lead to increased cell-wall cross-linking and thereby facilitate β-lactam resistance. Finally, there is a possibility of an interaction between PBP4 and other proteins and the R200L mutation may strengthen this binding. 

Supplementary Material 

dkab201_Supplementary_Data 

Click here for additional data file. (2MB, docx) 

Acknowledgements 

We are thankful to the Chatterjee lab for providing valuable feedback. E.B. was an undergraduate college student who worked on this project under the supervision of S.S.C. at UCSF. 

Data described here were collected using beamline 08B1-1 at the Canadian Light Source, which is supported by the Canada Foundation for Innovation, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the University of Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan, Western Economic Diversification Canada, the National Research Council Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. We thank the staff of beamline 08B1-1 for their assistance with sample handling for data collection. Additionally, we thank staff at the University of British Columbia Proteomics Core Facility for processing the MS samples. 

Funding 

This work was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants 2R01AI100291 and R21AI142501 awarded to S.S.C. along with operating funds awarded to N.C.J.S. from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and the Howard Hughes Medical Institutes International Scholar Program. N.C.J.S. is supported by a Tier 1 Canada Research Chair and J.A.N.A. by a CIHR Vanier Scholarship. 

Transparency declarations 

None to declare. 

Supplementary data 

Supplementary data , including Tables S1 to S7 and Figures S1 to S6 , are available at JAC Online. 

References 

1. Macheboeuf P, Contreras-Martel C, Job V. 
et al. 
Penicillin binding proteins: key players in bacterial cell cycle and drug resistance processes. FEMS Microbiol Rev 2006; 30: 673–91. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

2. Bush K, Bradford PA.. 
β-Lactam and β-lactamase inhibitors: an overview. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2016; 6: a025247. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

3. Chambers HF, Deleo FR.. 
Waves of resistance: Staphylococcus aureus in the antibiotic era. Nat Rev Microbiol 2009; 7: 629–41. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

4. Fuda CC, Fisher JF, Mobashery S.. 
β-Lactam resistance in Staphylococcus aureus : the adaptive resistance of a plastic genome. Cell Mol Life Sci 2005; 62: 2617–33. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

5. Basuino L, Jousselin A, Andrew J. 
et al. 
PBP4 activity and its overexpression are necessary for PBP4-mediated high-level β-lactam resistance. J Antimicrob Chemother 2018; 73: 1177–80. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

6. Greninger AL, Chatterjee SS, Chan LC. 
et al. 
Whole-genome sequencing of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus resistant to fifth-generation cephalosporins reveals potential non- mecA mechanisms of resistance. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0149541. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

7. Chatterjee SS, Chen L, Gilbert A. 
et al. 
PBP4 mediates β-lactam resistance by altered function. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2017; 61: e00932–17. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

8. Argudín MA, Roisin S, Nienhaus L. 
et al. 
Genetic diversity among Staphylococcus aureus isolates showing oxacillin and/or cefoxitin resistance not linked to the presence of mec genes. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2018; 62: e00091–18. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

9. Argudín MA, Dodemont M, Taguemount M. 
et al. In vitro activity of ceftaroline against clinical Staphylococcus aureus isolates collected during a national survey conducted in Belgian hospitals. J Antimicrob Chemother 2017; 72: 56–9. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

10. Mesak LR, Yim G, Davies J.. 
Improved lux reporters for use in Staphylococcus aureus . Plasmid 2009; 61: 182–7. [ DOI ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

11. Chambers HF, Sachdeva MJ, Hackbarth CJ.. 
Kinetics of penicillin binding to penicillin-binding proteins of Staphylococcus aureus . Biochem J 1994; 301: 139–44. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

12. Nicola G, Tomberg J, Pratt RF. 
et al. 
Crystal structures of covalent complexes of β-lactam antibiotics with Escherichia coli penicillin-binding protein 5: toward an understanding of antibiotic specificity. Biochemistry 2010; 49: 8094–104. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

13. Hamilton SM, Alexander JAN, Choo EJ. 
et al. 
High-level resistance of Staphylococcus aureus to β-lactam antibiotics mediated by penicillin-binding protein 4 (PBP4). Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2017; 61: e02727–16. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

14. Maya-Martinez R, Alexander JAN, Otten CF. 
et al. 
Recognition of peptidoglycan fragments by the transpeptidase PBP4 from Staphylococcus aureus . Front Microbiol 2019; 9: 3223. [ DOI ] [ PMC free article ] [ PubMed ] [ Google Scholar ] 

Associated Data 

This section collects any data citations, data availability statements, or supplementary materials included in this article. 

Supplementary Materials 

dkab201_Supplementary_Data 

Click here for additional data file. (2MB, docx) 

Articles from Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy are provided here courtesy of Oxford University Press 

ACTIONS 

View on publisher site 

PDF (433.5 KB) 

Cite 

Collections 

Permalink 

PERMALINK 

Copy 

RESOURCES 

Similar articles 

Cited by other articles 

Links to NCBI Databases 

Cite 

Copy 

Download .nbib .nbib 

Format: AMA APA MLA NLM 

Add to Collections 

Create a new collection 

Add to an existing collection 

Name your collection * 

Choose a collection 
Unable to load your collection due to an error Please try again 

Add Cancel 

Follow NCBI 

NCBI on X (formerly known as Twitter) NCBI on Facebook NCBI on LinkedIn NCBI on GitHub NCBI RSS feed 

Connect with NLM 

NLM on X (formerly known as Twitter) NLM on Facebook NLM on YouTube 

National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 

Web Policies 

FOIA 

HHS Vulnerability Disclosure 

Help 

Accessibility 

Careers 

NLM 

NIH 

HHS 

USA.gov 

Back to Top
