PMID: 34228551
PMCID: PMC8370223
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.00890-21
Title: KPC-Mediated Resistance to Ceftazidime-Avibactam and Collateral Effects in Klebsiella pneumoniae.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2021 Aug 17
Authors: Findlay J, Poirel L, Juhas M, Nordmann P
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
ABSTRACT Carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales , such as Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC)-producing K. pneumoniae , represent a major threat to public health due to their rapid spread. Novel drug combinations such as ceftazidime-avibactam (CZA), combining a broad-spectrum cephalosporin along with a broad-spectrum β-lactamase inhibitor, have recently been introduced and have been shown to exhibit excellent activity toward multidrug-resistant KPC-producing Enterobacterales strains. However, CZA-resistant K. pneumoniae isolates are now being increasingly reported, mostly corresponding to producers of KPC variants. In this study, we evaluated in vitro the nature of the mutations in the KPC-2 and KPC-3 β-lactamase sequences (the most frequent KPC-type enzymes) that lead to CZA resistance and the subsequent effects of these mutations on susceptibility to other β-lactam antibiotics. Single-step in vitro selection assays were conducted, resulting in the identification of a series of mutations in the KPC sequence which conferred the ability of those mutated enzymes to confer resistance to CZA. Hence, 16 KPC-2 variants and 10 KPC-3 variants were obtained. Production of the KPC variants in an Escherichia coli recombinant strain resulted in a concomitant increased susceptibility to broad-spectrum cephalosporins and carbapenems, with the exceptions of ceftazidime and piperacillin-tazobactam, compared to wild-type KPC enzymes. Enzymatic assays showed that all of the KPC variants identified exhibited an increased affinity toward ceftazidime and a slightly decreased sensitivity to avibactam, sustaining their impact on CZA resistance. However, their respective carbapenemase activities were concurrently negatively impacted.
