PMID: 34930034
PMCID: PMC8846482
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.02067-21
Title: Selection of AmpC β-Lactamase Variants and Metallo-β-Lactamases Leading to Ceftolozane/Tazobactam and Ceftazidime/Avibactam Resistance during Treatment of MDR/XDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa Infections.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 2022 Feb 15
Authors: Ruedas-López A, Alonso-García I, Lasarte-Monterrubio C, Guijarro-Sánchez P, Gato E, Vázquez-Ucha JC, Vallejo JA, Fraile-Ribot PA, Fernández-Pérez B, Velasco D, Gutiérrez-Urbón JM, Oviaño M, Beceiro A, González-Bello C, Oliver A, Arca-Suárez J, Bou G
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
ABSTRACT Infections caused by ceftolozane-tazobactam and ceftazidime-avibactam-resistant P. aeruginosa infections are an emerging concern. We aimed to analyze the underlying ceftolozane-tazobactam and ceftazidime-avibactam resistance mechanisms in all multidrug-resistant or extensively drug-resistant (MDR/XDR) P. aeruginosa isolates recovered during 1 year (2020) from patients with a documented P. aeruginosa infection. Fifteen isolates showing ceftolozane-tazobactam and ceftazidime-avibactam resistance were evaluated. Clinical conditions, previous positive cultures, and β-lactams received in the previous month were reviewed for each patient. MICs were determined by broth microdilution. Multilocus sequence types (MLSTs) and resistance mechanisms were determined using short- and long-read whole-genome sequencing (WGS). The impact of Pseudomonas - derived cephalosporinases (PDCs) on β-lactam resistance was demonstrated by cloning into an ampC -deficient PAO1 derivative (PAOΔC) and construction of 3D models. Genetic support of acquired β-lactamases was determined in silico from high-quality hybrid assemblies. In most cases, the isolates were recovered after treatment with ceftolozane-tazobactam or ceftazidime-avibactam. Seven isolates from different sequence types (STs) owed their β-lactam resistance to chromosomal mutations and all displayed specific substitutions in PDC: Phe121Leu and Gly222Ser, Pro154Leu, Ala201Thr, Gly214Arg, ΔGly203-Glu219, and Glu219Lys. In the other eight isolates, the ST175 clone was overrepresented (6 isolates) and associated with IMP-28 and IMP-13, whereas two ST1284 isolates produced VIM-2. The cloned PDCs conferred enhanced cephalosporin resistance. The 3D PDC models revealed rearrangements affecting residues involved in cephalosporin hydrolysis. Carbapenemases were chromosomal (VIM-2) or plasmid-borne (IMP-28, IMP-13) and associated with class-1 integrons located in Tn402-like transposition modules. Our findings highlighted that cephalosporin/β-lactamase inhibitors are potential selectors of MDR/XDR P. aeruginosa strains producing PDC variants or metallo-β-lactamases. Judicious use of these agents is encouraged.
