PMID: 35107303
PMCID: PMC8925889
DOI: 10.1128/jcm.02245-21
Title: Impact of Ceftazidime-Avibactam Treatment in the Emergence of Novel KPC Variants in the ST307-Klebsiella pneumoniae High-Risk Clone and Consequences for Their Routine Detection.
Journal: Journal of clinical microbiology
PubDate: 2022 Mar 16
Authors: Hernández-García M, Castillo-Polo JA, Cordero DG, Pérez-Viso B, García-Castillo M, Saez de la Fuente J, Morosini MI, Cantón R, Ruiz-Garbajosa P
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
ABSTRACT The emergence of Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates carrying novel bla KPC variants conferring ceftazidime-avibactam (CAZ/AVI) resistance is being increasingly reported. We evaluated the accuracy of phenotypic methods commonly used in routine clinical laboratories in the detection of novel K. pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC) enzymes. Additionally, we characterized by whole-genome sequencing (WGS) the KPC-ST307- K. pneumoniae isolates recovered in our hospital before and after CAZ/AVI therapy. Rectal colonization or infection by carbapenem-resistant KPC-3 K. pneumoniae isolates (imipenem MIC, 16 mg/L; meropenem MIC, 8 to >16 mg/L) and CAZ/AVI-susceptible isolates (CAZ/AVI MIC, 1 to 2 mg/L) were first detected in three intensive care unit (ICU) patients admitted between March 2020 and July 2020. KPC K. pneumoniae isolates with increased CAZ/AVI MICs (8 to 32 mg/L) and carbapenem susceptibility (imipenem and meropenem MIC, <1 mg/L) were recovered within 6 to 24 days after CAZ/AVI treatment. WGS confirmed that all KPC K. pneumoniae isolates belonged to the sequence type 307 (ST307) high-risk clone and carried identical antimicrobial resistance genes and virulence factors. The presence of the novel bla KPC-46 , bla KPC-66 , and bla KPC-92 genes was confirmed in the K. pneumoniae isolates with increased CAZ/AVI MICs and restored carbapenem activity. KPC production was confirmed by immunochromatography, the eazyplex Superbug CRE system, and the Xpert Carba-R assay in all KPC K. pneumoniae isolates, but not in any isolate using chromogenic agar plates for carbapenemase producers (ChromID-CARBA), the KPC/MBL/OXA-48 Confirm kit, and the β-CARBA test. Nevertheless, all grew in chromogenic agar plates for extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) producers (ChromID-ESBL). We report the failure of the most common phenotypic methods used for the detection of novel KPC carbapenemases but not of rapid molecular or immunochromatography assays, thus highlighting their relevance in microbiology laboratories.
