PMID: 9056008
PMCID: PMC163766
DOI: 10.1128/AAC.41.3.647
Title: Evolution of extended-spectrum beta-lactam resistance (SHV-8) in a strain of Escherichia coli during multiple episodes of bacteremia.
Journal: Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy
PubDate: 1997 Mar
Authors: Rasheed JK, Jay C, Metchock B, Berkowitz F, Weigel L, Crellin J, Steward C, Hill B, Medeiros AA, Tenover FC
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
Nine isolates of Escherichia coli were recovered from seven blood cultures over a period of 3 months from a 19-month-old female with aplastic anemia. Initial isolates were susceptible to extended-spectrum cephalosporins, including ceftazidime (MIC, < or = 0.25 microgram/ml), but gradually became resistant to this drug (MICs, > or = 128 micrograms/ml) and other cephalosporins and the monobactam aztreonam. Molecular typing methods, including plasmid profile analysis, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, and arbitrarily primed PCR, indicated that the nine isolates were derived from a common ancestor. Dot blot hybridization and PCR analysis of total bacterial DNA using blaSHV- and blaTEM-specific DNA probes and primers identified the presence of a blaTEM beta-lactamase gene in all of the isolates and a blaSHV gene in the isolates with elevated ceftazidime MICs. Isoelectric focusing analysis of crude lysates showed that all nine isolates contained an enzyme with a pI of 5.4 corresponding to the TEM-1 beta-lactamase, and those isolates containing an SHV-type beta-lactamase demonstrated an additional band with a pI of 7.6. The first of the ceftazidime-resistant isolates appeared to hyperproduce the SHV enzyme compared to the other resistant isolates. DNA sequencing revealed a blaSHV-1 gene in the first ceftazidime-resistant isolate and a novel blaSHV gene, blaSHV-8, with an Asp-to-Asn substitution at amino acid position 179 in the remaining four isolates. Three of the ceftazidime-resistant isolates also showed a change in porin profile. The patient had received multiple courses of antimicrobial agents during her illness, including multiple courses of ceftazidime. This collection of blood isolates from the same patient appears to represent the in vivo evolution of resistance under selective pressure of treatment with various cephalosporins.
