PMID: 19938877
PMCID: PMC4018810
DOI: 10.1021/bi9015549
Title: Enhancing resistance to cephalosporins in class C beta-lactamases: impact of Gly214Glu in CMY-2.
Journal: Biochemistry
PubDate: 2010 Feb 9
Authors: Endimiani A, Doi Y, Bethel CR, Taracila M, Adams-Haduch JM, O'Keefe A, Hujer AM, Paterson DL, Skalweit MJ, Page MG, Drawz SM, Bonomo RA
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
The biochemical properties of CMY-32, a class C enzyme possessing a single amino acid substitution in the Ω loop (Gly214Glu) were compared to the parent enzyme, CMY-2, a widespread class C β-lactamase. In parallel with our microbiological characterization, the Gly214Glu substitution in CMY-32 reduced catalytic efficiency ( k cat / K m ) by 50-70% against “good” substrates (i.e., cephalothin) while increasing k cat / K m against “poor” substrates (i.e., cefotaxime). Additionally, CMY-32 was more susceptible to inactivation by sulfone β-lactamase inhibitors (i.e., sulbactam and tazobactam) than CMY-2. Timed electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) analysis of the reaction of CMY-2 and CMY-32 with different substrates and inhibitors suggested that both β-lactamases formed similar intermediates during catalysis and inactivation. We next showed that the carbapenems (imipenem, meropenem, and doripenem) form long-lived acyl-enzyme intermediates and present evidence that there is β-lactamase-catalyzed elimination of the C 6 hydroxyethyl substituent. Furthermore, we discovered that the monobactam aztreonam and BAL29880 , a new β-lactamase inhibitor of the monobactam class, inactivate CMY-2 and CMY-32 by forming an acyl-enzyme intermediate that undergoes elimination of -SO 3 -2 . Molecular modeling and dynamics simulations suggest that the Ω loop is more constrained in CMY-32 than CMY-2. Our model also proposes that Gln120 adopts a novel conformation in the active site while new interactions form between Glu214 and Tyr221, thus explaining increased cefotaxime hydrolysis. When docked in the active site, we observe that BAL29880 exploits contacts with highly conserved residues Lys67 and Asn152 in CMY-2 and CMY-32. These findings highlight: i ) the impact of single amino acid substitutions on protein evolution in clinically important AmpC enzymes; and ii ) the novel insights into the mechanisms by which carbapenems and monobactams interact with CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS
Detection and cloning of bla CMY genes and expression in E. coli DH10B cells We used two clinical E. coli isolates to obtain the constructs employed in this study. The first strain carried the bla CMY-2 gene and was detected in 2002 in Cleveland (OH), whereas the second strain possessed the bla CMY-32 gene and was discovered in 2006 in Pittsburgh (PA) ( 22 , 23 ). Specific primers were used to amplify both bla CMY genes (For: 5′-CCGGACACCTTTTTGCTTTT-3′; Rev: 5′-TATCCTGGGCCTCATCGTCAGTTA-3′). As previously reported, sequence analysis demonstrates that CMY-32 (GeneBank accession number: EU496815 ) possesses a single amino acid substitution (i.e., Gly214Glu) compared to CMY-2 (GeneBank accession number: EF406116 ) ( 23 ). Each bla CMY gene was cloned into the pBC SK(-) phagemid vector (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) as previously described ( 24 ). Commercially purchased electrocompetent E. coli DH10B cells (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA) were electroporated with the ligation mixture. We selected strains expressing the bla CMY genes on Luria-Bertani (LB) agar plates containing chloramphenicol (20 μg/mL) and ampicillin (100 μg/mL). Phenotypic characterization Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) for the following β-lactams were obtained using the Etest method (AB Biodisk, Solna, Sweden) on cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton agar (BBL, Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD): ampicillin; ampicillin-sulbactam; amoxicillin-clavulanate; piperacillin; piperacillin-tazobactam; cefoxitin; cefotaxime (CTX); ceftazidime; cefepime; aztreonam (ATM); imipenem; and meropenem (see Figure 1 for the chemical structures of several of these compounds). The inhibitory activity of BAL29880 (Basilea Pharmaceutica International Ltd, Basel, Switzerland) was evaluated by microdilution in cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth, according to the Clinical Laboratory Standard Institute criteria ( 25 ). This inhibitor was also combined with ampicillin and piperacillin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) at a constant concentration of 4 μg/mL. The following American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) control strains were used as controls: E. coli ATCC 25922, Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853, and K. pneumoniae ATCC 700603. β-Lactamase expression Polyclonal anti-CMY-2 antibodies were produced by Genosys Biotech, Inc. (Woodlands, TX) and purified using a HiTrap™ Protein G HP column (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden) as previously reported ( 26 ). E. coli DH10B isolates containing bla CMY-2 and bla CMY-32 were grown in LB broth to an OD 600 of 0.8. Preparation of samples, immunoblotting, and assessment of β-lactamase expression were performed using a method previously described ( 26 ). β-lactamase purification Each E. coli DH10B strain containing the bla CMY gene expressed in the pBC SK(-) vector was grown overnight at 37°C in 4 liters of SOB broth supplemented with ampicillin (100 μg/mL) and chloramphenicol (20 μg/mL). Cells were then pelleted and resuspended in 50 ml of 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.4). β-lactamases were released using lysozyme, EDTA (Sigma Chemical Co.), and DNase (Promega, Madison, WI) according to a previously established protocol ( 27 ). We performed preparative isoelectric focusing (pIEF) using a Sephadex G100 gel matrix and commercially prepared ampholines (pH 3.5 to 10.0; Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). The parameters used for pIEF were described previously ( 28 ). After running pIEF overnight, areas of the gel demonstrating β-lactamase activity by nitrocefin (NCF) overlay were cut from the gel, eluted with PBS (pH 7.4) on polyethylene glycol columns (Amersham Biosciences), and concentrated using an Amicon Ultra-4 concentrator (MW cutoff = 10,000; Millipore, Carrigtwohill, Co Cork, Ireland). Protein concentrations were determined by spectrophotometric assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) using bovine serum albumin as a standard. We further purified CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases to homogeneity using size exclusion chromatography with a Pharmacia ÄKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB). We employed a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB) and eluted with PBS (pH 7.4). We assessed the purity of β-lactamases by running the samples in sodium dodecyl-sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. Gels were stained using Coomassie blue R-250 (Fisher, Pittsburgh, PA), and protein molecular weight was estimated using pre-stained low-molecular-weight standards (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Kinetic experiments Based upon the reaction scheme outlined in Eq. 1 , we measured steady-state kinetic parameters (i.e., K m , k cat , and k cat / K m ) by continuous assays at room temperature. The Michaelis constants were determined using nonlinear least squares fit of the data (Henri-Michaelis equation, Eq.2 ) employing the program Enzfitter (Biosoft Corp., Ferguson, MO) ( 29 , 30 ) where: (Eq. 2) v = V max [ S ] / ( K m + [ S ] ) We used an Agilent™ 8453 diode array spectrophotometer with a 1-cm path length and determined each parameter in triplicate in PBS buffer (pH 7.4). Initial velocity measurements were obtained for the following “good substrates” (as defined by k cat ≥ 2 s -1 ) ( 31 ): NCF (Δ ε 482 = 17,400 M −1 cm −1 ), cephaloridine (Δ ε 260 = -10,200 M −1 cm −1 ), cephalothin (Δ ε 262 = -7,660 M −1 cm −1 ), and cefoxitin (Δ ε 260 = -7,700 M −1 cm −1 ). For “poor substrates” ( k cat ≤ 2 s -1 or non-measurable; i.e., cefotaxime, Δε 260 = -7,500 M cm −1 ), the apparent K m values were obtained as competitive inhibition constants ( K i ) in the presence of NCF. To characterize the β-lactamase inhibitors (clavulanic acid, sulbactam, tazobactam and BAL29880 ) we measured the first-order rate constant for enzyme and inhibitor complex inactivation ( k inact ) by monitoring the reaction time courses in the presence of inhibitor and NCF under steady state conditions. A fixed concentration of enzyme (i.e., E = 1.6 nM for CMY-2 or 3.1 nM for CMY-32), 100 μM NCF, and increasing concentrations of inhibitor (I) were used in each assay. The k obs values were determined using a non-linear least squares fit of the data employing Origin 7.5 ® (OriginLab Co., Northampton, MA): (Eq. 3) A = A 0 + v f t + ( v 0 − v f ) [ 1 - exp ( - k obs t ) ] / k obs Here, A is absorbance, v 0 (expressed in variation of absorbance per unit time) is initial velocity, v f is final velocity, and t is time ( 32 ). Each k obs was plotted vs I and fit to determine k inact (Eq. 4) k obs = ( k intact I ) / ( k intact + I ) In a similar manner to our determination of K i for poor substrates, we determined K i of each inhibitor. We corrected the K i values for the presence of NCF using Eq. 5 . (Eq. 5) K i corrected = K i observed / ( 1 + [ S ] / K m NCF ) We used Eq. 6 to calculate the percentage of the standard error (SE): (Eq. 6) SE of k cat / K m or k inact / K i = √ [ ( SE of k cat or k inact / k cat or k inact ) 2 + ( SE of K m or K i / K m or K i ) 2 ] Ultraviolet difference (UVD) spectroscopy UVD spectra of absorption were obtained for CMY-2 and CMY-32 (both 8 nM) reacted with CTX (8 μM) in 10 mM PBS (pH of 7.4). Wavelengths 200 to 500 nm were analyzed using the Agilent™ 8453 spectrophotometer for 1 hour at room temperature. Electrospray Ionization (ESI) Mass Spectrometry (MS) We performed timed ESI-MS of each CMY β-lactamase alone or in combination with β-lactam antibiotics or β-lactamase inhibitors on a Q-STAR XL quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Framingham, MA) equipped with a nanospray source as described ( 33 ). Two incubation times (i.e., 1 and 15 min) were analyzed for each β-lactamase inhibitor tested, whereas for the carbapenems only a 15 min incubation was performed. We desalted the reaction mixtures using C 18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The CMY-2 or CMY-32 β-lactamase sample was then diluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid to a concentration of 10 μM. We next infused this protein solution at a rate of 0.5 μl/min, and spectral data were collected for 2 min. Spectra were deconvoluted using the Analyst program (Applied Biosystems). Notably, all data reported in the Results section should be considered with a ± 3 Da standard error. Molecular modeling To generate a model of the CMY-32 enzyme we used the crystal structure of CMY-2 (Protein Data Bank, 1ZC2) and Discovery Studio (DS) 2.1 software (Accelrys, San Diego, CA). The protein was prepared for molecular dynamics simulations (MDS) by adding hydrogen atoms and setting the pH at 7.4. The CMY-32 model was created using the Build Module of DS by inserting a substitution at position 214 (i.e., Gly to Glu). First, the crystallographic waters were removed and the two β-lactamase models were immersed in a water box (i.e., 7 Å from any face of the box) using explicit periodic boundary conditions (PBCs). Then, the complexes were minimized in several steps, using Steepest Descendent and Conjugate Gradient algorithms to reach the minimum convergence (i.e., 0.02 kcal/mol × Å) after 10,000 iterations). All energy minimizations and MDSs were performed using CHARMm force-field parameters. We employed the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method to treat long-range electrostatic interactions. Bonds that involved hydrogen atoms were constrained with SHAKE algorithm. Following equilibration, two separate (2fs) MDS (Heating/Cooling and Production), at constant pressure and temperature (300°K), were carried out for the CMY-2 and CMY-32 models. The trajectories collected after the production steps were analyzed and the conformations with the minimum energies were chosen. The CMY-2 and CMY-32 models were superimposed. The model of the pre-acylation complex of the CMY-32 and CTX was developed using the Flexible Docking Module of DS 2.1. The side-chains of the active site amino acids (i.e., Ser64, Glu120, Asn152, Tyr221, Tyr150, Lys67, and Ser318) were allowed to move during docking. The low energy CTX conformations were docked into the active site of the CMY-32 model using LibDock ( 34 ). In the presence of CTX, the active site side-chain residues were refined using the ChiRotor algorithm ( 35 ). A final simulated annealing and energy minimization of each CTX conformation was performed using CDOCKER ( 34 ). The 10 resulting conformations of CTX were manually analyzed for hydrogen bonds, steric clashes and distances between atoms. The energies were evaluated and the most favorable conformation was chosen. The complex that was created was further energy minimized. A model of the acyl-enzyme complex of the CMY-2 enzyme with BAL29880 was also constructed. The chemical structure of BAL29880 , built using the Fragment Builder tools of DS 2.1, was minimized using a Standard Dynamics Cascade protocol. CDOCKER algorithm was employed to dock BAL29880 in the active site of CMY-2 β-lactamase ( 34 ). The BAL29880 placement in the active site was specified using a binding site sphere. Random ligand conformations were generated from the initial structure through high temperature MDS. Grid-based simulated annealing followed by force field minimization refined the generated conformations. Starting with the most energetically favorable conformation, we created and energy minimized the acyl-enzyme complex.

## DETECTION AND CLONING OF BLA
CMY genes and expression in E. coli DH10B cells We used two clinical E. coli isolates to obtain the constructs employed in this study. The first strain carried the bla CMY-2 gene and was detected in 2002 in Cleveland (OH), whereas the second strain possessed the bla CMY-32 gene and was discovered in 2006 in Pittsburgh (PA) ( 22 , 23 ). Specific primers were used to amplify both bla CMY genes (For: 5′-CCGGACACCTTTTTGCTTTT-3′; Rev: 5′-TATCCTGGGCCTCATCGTCAGTTA-3′). As previously reported, sequence analysis demonstrates that CMY-32 (GeneBank accession number: EU496815 ) possesses a single amino acid substitution (i.e., Gly214Glu) compared to CMY-2 (GeneBank accession number: EF406116 ) ( 23 ). Each bla CMY gene was cloned into the pBC SK(-) phagemid vector (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) as previously described ( 24 ). Commercially purchased electrocompetent E. coli DH10B cells (Invitrogen Corporation, Carlsbad, CA) were electroporated with the ligation mixture. We selected strains expressing the bla CMY genes on Luria-Bertani (LB) agar plates containing chloramphenicol (20 μg/mL) and ampicillin (100 μg/mL).

## PHENOTYPIC CHARACTERIZATION
Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) for the following β-lactams were obtained using the Etest method (AB Biodisk, Solna, Sweden) on cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton agar (BBL, Becton Dickinson, Sparks, MD): ampicillin; ampicillin-sulbactam; amoxicillin-clavulanate; piperacillin; piperacillin-tazobactam; cefoxitin; cefotaxime (CTX); ceftazidime; cefepime; aztreonam (ATM); imipenem; and meropenem (see Figure 1 for the chemical structures of several of these compounds). The inhibitory activity of BAL29880 (Basilea Pharmaceutica International Ltd, Basel, Switzerland) was evaluated by microdilution in cation-adjusted Mueller-Hinton broth, according to the Clinical Laboratory Standard Institute criteria ( 25 ). This inhibitor was also combined with ampicillin and piperacillin (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) at a constant concentration of 4 μg/mL. The following American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) control strains were used as controls: E. coli ATCC 25922, Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC 27853, and K. pneumoniae ATCC 700603.

## Β-LACTAMASE EXPRESSION
Polyclonal anti-CMY-2 antibodies were produced by Genosys Biotech, Inc. (Woodlands, TX) and purified using a HiTrap™ Protein G HP column (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB, Uppsala, Sweden) as previously reported ( 26 ). E. coli DH10B isolates containing bla CMY-2 and bla CMY-32 were grown in LB broth to an OD 600 of 0.8. Preparation of samples, immunoblotting, and assessment of β-lactamase expression were performed using a method previously described ( 26 ).

## Β-LACTAMASE PURIFICATION
Each E. coli DH10B strain containing the bla CMY gene expressed in the pBC SK(-) vector was grown overnight at 37°C in 4 liters of SOB broth supplemented with ampicillin (100 μg/mL) and chloramphenicol (20 μg/mL). Cells were then pelleted and resuspended in 50 ml of 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 7.4). β-lactamases were released using lysozyme, EDTA (Sigma Chemical Co.), and DNase (Promega, Madison, WI) according to a previously established protocol ( 27 ). We performed preparative isoelectric focusing (pIEF) using a Sephadex G100 gel matrix and commercially prepared ampholines (pH 3.5 to 10.0; Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ). The parameters used for pIEF were described previously ( 28 ). After running pIEF overnight, areas of the gel demonstrating β-lactamase activity by nitrocefin (NCF) overlay were cut from the gel, eluted with PBS (pH 7.4) on polyethylene glycol columns (Amersham Biosciences), and concentrated using an Amicon Ultra-4 concentrator (MW cutoff = 10,000; Millipore, Carrigtwohill, Co Cork, Ireland). Protein concentrations were determined by spectrophotometric assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) using bovine serum albumin as a standard. We further purified CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases to homogeneity using size exclusion chromatography with a Pharmacia ÄKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB). We employed a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 75 column (GE Healthcare Bio-Sciences AB) and eluted with PBS (pH 7.4). We assessed the purity of β-lactamases by running the samples in sodium dodecyl-sulfate-polyacrylamide gels. Gels were stained using Coomassie blue R-250 (Fisher, Pittsburgh, PA), and protein molecular weight was estimated using pre-stained low-molecular-weight standards (Bio-Rad Laboratories).

## KINETIC EXPERIMENTS
Based upon the reaction scheme outlined in Eq. 1 , we measured steady-state kinetic parameters (i.e., K m , k cat , and k cat / K m ) by continuous assays at room temperature. The Michaelis constants were determined using nonlinear least squares fit of the data (Henri-Michaelis equation, Eq.2 ) employing the program Enzfitter (Biosoft Corp., Ferguson, MO) ( 29 , 30 ) where: (Eq. 2) v = V max [ S ] / ( K m + [ S ] ) We used an Agilent™ 8453 diode array spectrophotometer with a 1-cm path length and determined each parameter in triplicate in PBS buffer (pH 7.4). Initial velocity measurements were obtained for the following “good substrates” (as defined by k cat ≥ 2 s -1 ) ( 31 ): NCF (Δ ε 482 = 17,400 M −1 cm −1 ), cephaloridine (Δ ε 260 = -10,200 M −1 cm −1 ), cephalothin (Δ ε 262 = -7,660 M −1 cm −1 ), and cefoxitin (Δ ε 260 = -7,700 M −1 cm −1 ). For “poor substrates” ( k cat ≤ 2 s -1 or non-measurable; i.e., cefotaxime, Δε 260 = -7,500 M cm −1 ), the apparent K m values were obtained as competitive inhibition constants ( K i ) in the presence of NCF. To characterize the β-lactamase inhibitors (clavulanic acid, sulbactam, tazobactam and BAL29880 ) we measured the first-order rate constant for enzyme and inhibitor complex inactivation ( k inact ) by monitoring the reaction time courses in the presence of inhibitor and NCF under steady state conditions. A fixed concentration of enzyme (i.e., E = 1.6 nM for CMY-2 or 3.1 nM for CMY-32), 100 μM NCF, and increasing concentrations of inhibitor (I) were used in each assay. The k obs values were determined using a non-linear least squares fit of the data employing Origin 7.5 ® (OriginLab Co., Northampton, MA): (Eq. 3) A = A 0 + v f t + ( v 0 − v f ) [ 1 - exp ( - k obs t ) ] / k obs Here, A is absorbance, v 0 (expressed in variation of absorbance per unit time) is initial velocity, v f is final velocity, and t is time ( 32 ). Each k obs was plotted vs I and fit to determine k inact (Eq. 4) k obs = ( k intact I ) / ( k intact + I ) In a similar manner to our determination of K i for poor substrates, we determined K i of each inhibitor. We corrected the K i values for the presence of NCF using Eq. 5 . (Eq. 5) K i corrected = K i observed / ( 1 + [ S ] / K m NCF ) We used Eq. 6 to calculate the percentage of the standard error (SE): (Eq. 6) SE of k cat / K m or k inact / K i = √ [ ( SE of k cat or k inact / k cat or k inact ) 2 + ( SE of K m or K i / K m or K i ) 2 ]

## ULTRAVIOLET DIFFERENCE (UVD) SPECTROSCOPY
UVD spectra of absorption were obtained for CMY-2 and CMY-32 (both 8 nM) reacted with CTX (8 μM) in 10 mM PBS (pH of 7.4). Wavelengths 200 to 500 nm were analyzed using the Agilent™ 8453 spectrophotometer for 1 hour at room temperature.

## ELECTROSPRAY IONIZATION (ESI) MASS SPECTROMETRY (MS)
We performed timed ESI-MS of each CMY β-lactamase alone or in combination with β-lactam antibiotics or β-lactamase inhibitors on a Q-STAR XL quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, Framingham, MA) equipped with a nanospray source as described ( 33 ). Two incubation times (i.e., 1 and 15 min) were analyzed for each β-lactamase inhibitor tested, whereas for the carbapenems only a 15 min incubation was performed. We desalted the reaction mixtures using C 18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA). The CMY-2 or CMY-32 β-lactamase sample was then diluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid to a concentration of 10 μM. We next infused this protein solution at a rate of 0.5 μl/min, and spectral data were collected for 2 min. Spectra were deconvoluted using the Analyst program (Applied Biosystems). Notably, all data reported in the Results section should be considered with a ± 3 Da standard error.

## MOLECULAR MODELING
To generate a model of the CMY-32 enzyme we used the crystal structure of CMY-2 (Protein Data Bank, 1ZC2) and Discovery Studio (DS) 2.1 software (Accelrys, San Diego, CA). The protein was prepared for molecular dynamics simulations (MDS) by adding hydrogen atoms and setting the pH at 7.4. The CMY-32 model was created using the Build Module of DS by inserting a substitution at position 214 (i.e., Gly to Glu). First, the crystallographic waters were removed and the two β-lactamase models were immersed in a water box (i.e., 7 Å from any face of the box) using explicit periodic boundary conditions (PBCs). Then, the complexes were minimized in several steps, using Steepest Descendent and Conjugate Gradient algorithms to reach the minimum convergence (i.e., 0.02 kcal/mol × Å) after 10,000 iterations). All energy minimizations and MDSs were performed using CHARMm force-field parameters. We employed the Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) method to treat long-range electrostatic interactions. Bonds that involved hydrogen atoms were constrained with SHAKE algorithm. Following equilibration, two separate (2fs) MDS (Heating/Cooling and Production), at constant pressure and temperature (300°K), were carried out for the CMY-2 and CMY-32 models. The trajectories collected after the production steps were analyzed and the conformations with the minimum energies were chosen. The CMY-2 and CMY-32 models were superimposed. The model of the pre-acylation complex of the CMY-32 and CTX was developed using the Flexible Docking Module of DS 2.1. The side-chains of the active site amino acids (i.e., Ser64, Glu120, Asn152, Tyr221, Tyr150, Lys67, and Ser318) were allowed to move during docking. The low energy CTX conformations were docked into the active site of the CMY-32 model using LibDock ( 34 ). In the presence of CTX, the active site side-chain residues were refined using the ChiRotor algorithm ( 35 ). A final simulated annealing and energy minimization of each CTX conformation was performed using CDOCKER ( 34 ). The 10 resulting conformations of CTX were manually analyzed for hydrogen bonds, steric clashes and distances between atoms. The energies were evaluated and the most favorable conformation was chosen. The complex that was created was further energy minimized. A model of the acyl-enzyme complex of the CMY-2 enzyme with BAL29880 was also constructed. The chemical structure of BAL29880 , built using the Fragment Builder tools of DS 2.1, was minimized using a Standard Dynamics Cascade protocol. CDOCKER algorithm was employed to dock BAL29880 in the active site of CMY-2 β-lactamase ( 34 ). The BAL29880 placement in the active site was specified using a binding site sphere. Random ligand conformations were generated from the initial structure through high temperature MDS. Grid-based simulated annealing followed by force field minimization refined the generated conformations. Starting with the most energetically favorable conformation, we created and energy minimized the acyl-enzyme complex.

## RESULTS
Phenotype characterization In order to measure the impact of a single amino acid substitution on the hydrolytic activity of the CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases in E. coli , we performed MICs in a uniform genetic background. As shown in Table 1 , both CMY β-lactamases expressed in E. coli DH10B confer high-level resistance to ampicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanate, piperacillin and ceftazidime (MICs > 256 μg/mL), whereas piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, and carbapenems demonstrated MICs in the susceptible ranges (≤ 6 μg/mL). Noticeably, the strain expressing CMY-32 was more susceptible to ampicillin-sulbactam and cefoxitin than strain harboring CMY-2 ( 36 ). In contrast, the MIC for CTX was significantly higher for CMY-32 than CMY-2 when tested in E. coli (64 vs. 16 μg/mL). We observed the same trend when testing ATM (MIC of 12 vs. 6 μg/mL). Although a slight increase of MIC was observed for both E. coli clones containing CMY-2 or CMY-32 when compared to the E. coli DH10B, full resistance to cefepime was not established ( Table 1 ). To further characterize the phenotype of CMY-32 in E. coli DH10B, we also tested the activity of the novel monobactam inhibitor and compared it to ATM. BAL29880 alone did not show activity against E. coli DH10B, including those expressing the bla CMY genes (MICs > 32 μg/mL). However, in combination with ampicillin or piperacillin, BAL29880 lowered MICs considerably (i.e., ≤ 4 μg/mL) for strains expressing CMY-2 or CMY-32 ( Table 1 ). β-Lactamase expression In order to ensure that the differences in MICs between the E. coli DH10B producing bla CMY-2 and that producing bla CMY-32 were not due to changes in expression levels of the proteins, we performed immunoblots using a specific anti-CMY-2 polyclonal antibody. Steady-state expression levels of CMY-2 and CMY-32 in E. coli DH10B showed that the strain expressing CMY-2 produced similar quantities of β-lactamase as the strain harborig CMY-32 pAmpC (data not shown). Kinetics and UVD spectroscopy Steady-state kinetic parameters revealed that CMY-32 possessed significantly less catalytic efficiency ( k cat / K m ) for hydrolyzing the narrow-spectrum cephalosporins (NCF, cephaloridine, and cephalothin) compared to CMY-2 ( Table 2 ). These results were mainly due to reductions in k cat rather than K m . A decrease in turnover was also seen with cefoxitin, a 7-α-methoxy cephalosporin ( 14 , 37 ), ( Table 2 ). The turnover of CTX, an oxyimino amino-thiazole cephalosporin that is regarded as a “poor substrate”, is often difficult to measure due to its low k cat ( 14 , 31 ). Here, we followed the hydrolysis of CTX by CMY-2 and -32 using UVD absorption spectra. In the Supporting Information (Figure 1 supplement) we show the increase in hydrolysis of CTX by CMY-32 vs. CMY-2 (see λ max = 228 nm). Consistent with MICs, cefepime, an extended-spectrum cephalosporin that is also “poor substrate” for class C enzymes, was poorly hydrolyzed by CMY-2 and CMY-32 ( K m > 100 μM, k cat not measurable; Table 2 ) ( 14 , 37 ). For ATM and imipenem, we did not observe hydrolysis by either CMY-2 or CMY-32 under saturating conditions ( Table 2 ). To understand why this occurred, we employed ESI-MS (see below) and observed that ATM and imipenem formed long-lived covalent complexes with both β-lactamases. In competition experiments with NCF, we observed that the affinity for CMY-2 and CMY-32 was greater than for any substrate tested ( K i ≤ 600 nM) The commercially available β-lactamases inhibitors (tazobactam, sulbactam, and clavulanate) were not very effective at inhibiting the two CMY enzymes ( Table 3 ). Consistent with our MIC determinations showing increase in susceptibility to ampicillin-sulbactam and piperacillin-tazobactam, these inhibitors possessed lower K i (by at least 40%) against CMY-32 β-lactamase than CMY-2 ( Table 3 ). The K i of BAL29880 , the novel monobactam, for CMY-2 and CMY-32 was lower than the three commercially available inhibitors. Furthermore, our MIC data indicated that BAL29880 requires a β-lactam partner for full efficacy (MIC ≤ 2 μg/mL). Additionally, we observed a notable finding regarding the kinetics of inactivation of CMY-2 and CMY-32 with tazobactam. Compared to the other inhibitors, tazobactam demonstrates a k inact value at least 3-fold greater than sulbactam, clavulanate or BAL29880 . This more rapid inactivation constant coupled with greater affinity (lower K i ) is also consistent with the MIC results. ESI-MS We employed ESI-MS to gain insight into the nature of the intermediates formed in the inactivation of CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases. To begin, we established that the molecular weight (MW) of CMY-2 is 39,854 Da, whereas that of CMY-32 is 39,926 Da, consistent with the predicted molecular weights of the proteins ( Figure 2 ). Since carbapenems are known to be poorly hydrolyzed by both class A and C β-lactamases, we first sought to determine if imipenem, meropenem and doripenem would form a stable acyl-enzyme adduct with CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases ( 38 ). At 15 minutes, the inactivation of CMY-2 and CMY-32 with imipenem in a ratio of 1:1,000 produced adducts of +299 Da, corresponding to the molecular weight of imipenem ( Figure 2 ). However, when the ratio of E:I was reduced to 1:20, an additional minor adduct with a mass defect of 44 Da was seen (data not shown). We observed the same phenomenon with meropenem and doripenem ( Figure 2 ). We next inactivated CMY-2 and CMY-32 with tazobactam, sulbactam, ATM, and BAL29880 . In the course of our analysis, it became evident that the ESI-MS determinations obtained after 1 and 15 min incubations were equivalent. Therefore, in Figure 3 we present only one of the timed reactions. As shown in Figure 3 , inactivation of both β-lactamases with the sulfones yielded products of +72 and +87 Da. The fragmentation of sulbactam to yield similar adducts as tazobactam supports a common mechanism of inactivation by sulfone inhibitors. As stated above, we also demonstrated that both ATM and BAL29880 form acyl-enzyme species by ESI-MS. As with the carbapenems, we detected two species ( Figure 3 ), one 80 Da less than the other. This suggested to us that there is fragmentation of ATM and BAL29880 as is seen with the carbapenems.

## PHENOTYPE CHARACTERIZATION
In order to measure the impact of a single amino acid substitution on the hydrolytic activity of the CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases in E. coli , we performed MICs in a uniform genetic background. As shown in Table 1 , both CMY β-lactamases expressed in E. coli DH10B confer high-level resistance to ampicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanate, piperacillin and ceftazidime (MICs > 256 μg/mL), whereas piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, and carbapenems demonstrated MICs in the susceptible ranges (≤ 6 μg/mL). Noticeably, the strain expressing CMY-32 was more susceptible to ampicillin-sulbactam and cefoxitin than strain harboring CMY-2 ( 36 ). In contrast, the MIC for CTX was significantly higher for CMY-32 than CMY-2 when tested in E. coli (64 vs. 16 μg/mL). We observed the same trend when testing ATM (MIC of 12 vs. 6 μg/mL). Although a slight increase of MIC was observed for both E. coli clones containing CMY-2 or CMY-32 when compared to the E. coli DH10B, full resistance to cefepime was not established ( Table 1 ). To further characterize the phenotype of CMY-32 in E. coli DH10B, we also tested the activity of the novel monobactam inhibitor and compared it to ATM. BAL29880 alone did not show activity against E. coli DH10B, including those expressing the bla CMY genes (MICs > 32 μg/mL). However, in combination with ampicillin or piperacillin, BAL29880 lowered MICs considerably (i.e., ≤ 4 μg/mL) for strains expressing CMY-2 or CMY-32 ( Table 1 ).

## Β-LACTAMASE EXPRESSION
In order to ensure that the differences in MICs between the E. coli DH10B producing bla CMY-2 and that producing bla CMY-32 were not due to changes in expression levels of the proteins, we performed immunoblots using a specific anti-CMY-2 polyclonal antibody. Steady-state expression levels of CMY-2 and CMY-32 in E. coli DH10B showed that the strain expressing CMY-2 produced similar quantities of β-lactamase as the strain harborig CMY-32 pAmpC (data not shown).

## KINETICS AND UVD SPECTROSCOPY
Steady-state kinetic parameters revealed that CMY-32 possessed significantly less catalytic efficiency ( k cat / K m ) for hydrolyzing the narrow-spectrum cephalosporins (NCF, cephaloridine, and cephalothin) compared to CMY-2 ( Table 2 ). These results were mainly due to reductions in k cat rather than K m . A decrease in turnover was also seen with cefoxitin, a 7-α-methoxy cephalosporin ( 14 , 37 ), ( Table 2 ). The turnover of CTX, an oxyimino amino-thiazole cephalosporin that is regarded as a “poor substrate”, is often difficult to measure due to its low k cat ( 14 , 31 ). Here, we followed the hydrolysis of CTX by CMY-2 and -32 using UVD absorption spectra. In the Supporting Information (Figure 1 supplement) we show the increase in hydrolysis of CTX by CMY-32 vs. CMY-2 (see λ max = 228 nm). Consistent with MICs, cefepime, an extended-spectrum cephalosporin that is also “poor substrate” for class C enzymes, was poorly hydrolyzed by CMY-2 and CMY-32 ( K m > 100 μM, k cat not measurable; Table 2 ) ( 14 , 37 ). For ATM and imipenem, we did not observe hydrolysis by either CMY-2 or CMY-32 under saturating conditions ( Table 2 ). To understand why this occurred, we employed ESI-MS (see below) and observed that ATM and imipenem formed long-lived covalent complexes with both β-lactamases. In competition experiments with NCF, we observed that the affinity for CMY-2 and CMY-32 was greater than for any substrate tested ( K i ≤ 600 nM) The commercially available β-lactamases inhibitors (tazobactam, sulbactam, and clavulanate) were not very effective at inhibiting the two CMY enzymes ( Table 3 ). Consistent with our MIC determinations showing increase in susceptibility to ampicillin-sulbactam and piperacillin-tazobactam, these inhibitors possessed lower K i (by at least 40%) against CMY-32 β-lactamase than CMY-2 ( Table 3 ). The K i of BAL29880 , the novel monobactam, for CMY-2 and CMY-32 was lower than the three commercially available inhibitors. Furthermore, our MIC data indicated that BAL29880 requires a β-lactam partner for full efficacy (MIC ≤ 2 μg/mL). Additionally, we observed a notable finding regarding the kinetics of inactivation of CMY-2 and CMY-32 with tazobactam. Compared to the other inhibitors, tazobactam demonstrates a k inact value at least 3-fold greater than sulbactam, clavulanate or BAL29880 . This more rapid inactivation constant coupled with greater affinity (lower K i ) is also consistent with the MIC results.

## ESI-MS
We employed ESI-MS to gain insight into the nature of the intermediates formed in the inactivation of CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases. To begin, we established that the molecular weight (MW) of CMY-2 is 39,854 Da, whereas that of CMY-32 is 39,926 Da, consistent with the predicted molecular weights of the proteins ( Figure 2 ). Since carbapenems are known to be poorly hydrolyzed by both class A and C β-lactamases, we first sought to determine if imipenem, meropenem and doripenem would form a stable acyl-enzyme adduct with CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases ( 38 ). At 15 minutes, the inactivation of CMY-2 and CMY-32 with imipenem in a ratio of 1:1,000 produced adducts of +299 Da, corresponding to the molecular weight of imipenem ( Figure 2 ). However, when the ratio of E:I was reduced to 1:20, an additional minor adduct with a mass defect of 44 Da was seen (data not shown). We observed the same phenomenon with meropenem and doripenem ( Figure 2 ). We next inactivated CMY-2 and CMY-32 with tazobactam, sulbactam, ATM, and BAL29880 . In the course of our analysis, it became evident that the ESI-MS determinations obtained after 1 and 15 min incubations were equivalent. Therefore, in Figure 3 we present only one of the timed reactions. As shown in Figure 3 , inactivation of both β-lactamases with the sulfones yielded products of +72 and +87 Da. The fragmentation of sulbactam to yield similar adducts as tazobactam supports a common mechanism of inactivation by sulfone inhibitors. As stated above, we also demonstrated that both ATM and BAL29880 form acyl-enzyme species by ESI-MS. As with the carbapenems, we detected two species ( Figure 3 ), one 80 Da less than the other. This suggested to us that there is fragmentation of ATM and BAL29880 as is seen with the carbapenems.

## DISCUSSION
In the present work, we studied the biochemical characteristics of CMY-2 and its variant, CMY-32. Our analysis points to the distinctive properties that define the “extended-spectrum” phenotype of CMY-32. To emphasize the singular features of this “class C ESBL”, we draw comparisons to the well-studied class A ESBLs. Our work highlights the consequence of “natural protein engineering” (i.e. previous antibiotic selection pressure) on substrate specificity (i.e., emergence of CTX-resistant phenotype). Next, we describe the reaction intermediates observed when these carbapenems, sulfones, and monobactams react with CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases. Impact of Gly214Glu substitution on phenotype The phenotype we observed because of the Gly214Glu substitution is very reminiscent of class A ESBLs in E. coli and illustrates that in class C β-lactamases, a rather specific substitution located in the Ω loop that alters susceptibility and resistance to many β-lactams. Most strikingly, resistance to CTX and ATM is increased for E. coli bearing CMY-32 compared to CMY-2. In contrast, the class C CMY-32 β-lactamase expressed in E. coli DH10B resulted in a lower level of resistance to cefoxitin, as compared to CMY-2. Moreover, there is increased susceptibility to β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations and carbapenems. These properties are the “clinical hallmarks” that alert microbiology laboratories to the presence of ESBLs in E. coli , K. pneumoniae , and Proteus spp. Interestingly, there are many class A ESBLs of the TEM, SHV families that possess substitutions in the Ω loop that behave similarly ( 18 , 21 ). Impact of Gly214Glu on turnover of good and poor substrates The steady-state kinetic parameters of both CMY-2 and CMY-32 pAmpCs were consistent with the antimicrobial susceptibility profiles. First, we saw an overall reduction in k cat /K m for first-generation cephalosporins (i.e., cephaloridine and cephalothin), substrates that are generally “preferred” by class C enzymes ( 7 ). Likewise, cefoxitin, a 7-α-methoxy cephalosporin, which is usually hydrolyzed by AmpCs, has a 45% reduction in k cat / K m when hydrolyzed by CMY-32. Most strikingly, CMY-32 exhibits the ability to hydrolyze CTX ( k c at / K m = 0.22 μM -1 s -1 for CMY-32 compared to not measurable for CMY-2, see Table 2 and Supporting Information, Figure 1 ). Consistent with the kinetic behavior of other class C enzymes, CMY-2 and CMY-32 hydrolyzes imipenem poorly ( k cat not measurable). Following the reaction with timed ESI-MS, we see that imipenem accumulates in the unfragmented acyl-enzyme form for both CMY pAmpCs ( Figure 2 ). We observed this phenomenon only when the ratio of imipenem to CMYs was 1,000:1. Reducing the ratio to 20:1, we noted identical patterns with all three carbapenems. After the covalent adduct is formed, there is fragmentation to an acyl-enzyme species that is 44 Da less ( Figure 2 ). Similar results were observed with meropenem and doripenem. As previously observed for a chromosomal class A β-lactamase expressed by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the ADC-7 P-lactamase of Acinetobacter baumannii , these results suggest that, after β-lactam ring opening, the covalently bound carbapenem inactivation pathway splits between: i) direct hydrolysis with formation of unfragmented acyl-enzyme; ii) cleavage of the hydroxyethyl substituent ( 39 , 40 ). Investigations are underway to define the impact of this finding and identify of the residues that may facilitate this process. Impact of Gly214Glu on β-lactamase inhibitors For CMY-32, the Gly214Glu substitution lowers the K i for all clinically used inhibitors (the most dramatic change was for tazobactam and sulbactam), and significantly increases the k inact , a property that is also very common among class A ESBLs ( 1 ). Timed ESI-MS showed that both sulfone inhibitors follow a pattern of inhibition that generates the same postulated intermediates for both AmpCs (i.e., Δ=+88, the hydrated aldehyde and Δ=+72, the aldehyde). Originally, this was described for class A β-lactamases and CMY-2 ( 17 , 41 ). As sulbactam is regarded as a very poor inhibitor of class C enzymes ( K i > 100 μM), we were surprised to see adducts similar to those formed by tazobactam, a more effective inhibitor. Therefore, we maintain that even these class C serine β-lactamases pass through the imine and enamine transitional stages and that CMY-32 may form certain intermediates more readily than CMY-2. We stress that these findings also shed significant insight into why tazobactam serves as a good inhibitor of CMY β-lactamases, albeit unrecognized as such. Our data show that tazobactm possesses a first order rate constant of inactivation ( k inact ) for CMY-32 that was three fold greater than commercially available inhibitors. Together with the lower K i , the more rapid inactivation adds to the potency of the β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations. Aztreonam and BAL29880 , a monobactam substrate and a monobactam inactivator The most intriguing observations were made with ATM and BAL29880 . We generally regard ATM as a “poor substrate” and BAL29880 is an inhibitor. As result of the Gly214Glu substitution, CMY-32 expressed in E. coli has increased MICs against aztreonam. In contrast, BAL29880 does not appear to possess antibacterial activity (MICs > 32 μg/mL for E. coli with CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases). However, when combined with ampicillin or piperacillin, BAL29880 lowers MICs at least 6-twofold dilutions (≥ 256 to ≤ 4 μg/mL), a range similar to ATM alone against CMY-2 and CMY-32 ( Table 1 ). To understand why two monobactams behave so differently, we performed direct competition experiments using NCF as an indicator substrate and studied the reactions using timed ESI-MS. Here, ATM showed 30- to 55-fold greater affinity for CMY-2 and CMY-32 when compared to BAL29880 ( Table 2 and 3 ). This compelled us to explore possible mechanisms by which ATM and BAL29880 interact with CMY-2 and CMY-32. Timed ESI-MS analysis demonstrated that BAL29880 and ATM follow similar pathways of inhibition against both CMY-2 and CMY-32 pAmpCs ( Figure 3 ). Both monobactams acylate the CMY β-lactamases (i.e., Δ=+411 Da for BAL29880 or Δ=+435 Da for ATM) and form long-lived acyl enzymes. These findings were reminiscent of Oefner et al. who demonstrated that ATM, a poor substrate, acylates the active site Ser64 of the C. freundii AmpC β-lactamase (PDB, 1FR1), an enzyme with 97% amino acid homology to CMY-2 and CMY-32 ( 42 ). Therefore, we anticipated the presence of the full adduct added to CMY-2 and CMY-32 when ATM and BAL29880 were reacted with these class C cephalosporinases ( 42 , 43 ). Unexpectedly, we discovered that a second adduct was also formed. The MW of the second adduct is approximately 70 Da less than the first, suggesting that both monobactams undergo fragmentation after acylation of the CMY β-lactamase ( Figure 3 ). Mechanistically, the addition of water to the acyl-enzyme species would allow hydrolysis of the sulfonamide to yield the free sulfate ( Figure 4a and 4b ). Molecular models In order to explain the basis of affinity and specificity of the Gly214Glu substitution in the Ω loop of CMY-2, we constructed three molecular models. In the first model, we superimposed the energy minimized structures of CMY-32 and CMY-2 (rmsd = 1.0 Å) using backbone atoms and compared the conformation of the active sites paying particular attention to the Ω loop region (Val211 to Val223) ( Figure 5a and 5b ). The analysis of the trajectories generated after MDS showed an average potential movement of 1-3 Å in the region of Gly214Glu substitution. Our model shows that there is also significant change in the position of the Tyr221 side chain in the CMY-32 β-lactamase ( Figure 5b ). As result of the Gly to Glu substitution, Tyr221 likely moves within hydrogen bond distance to Glu214 (1.9 Å, Figure 5b ). Our interpretation is that this newly positioned hydrogen bond limits the overall flexibility and mobility of the Ω loop. Additionally, we observed that because of the Glu214-Tyr221 hydrogen bond, Gln120 adopts a new conformation in which the side chain is flipped more than 3.5 Å (see Figure 6 ). In our second model, we present an explanation of why CTX is hydrolyzed by CMY-32 β-lactamase. Using the energy-minimized structure of CMY-32, we docked the carbonyl of the 4-member ring of CTX in the oxyanion hole ( Figure 6 ). Because of the repositioning of Gln120 in CMY-32, we see a new hydrogen bond contact between Glu120:O and the terminal amide of the R1 side chain of CTX. In this model, the C4 carboxylate is in hydrogen bond distance with Arg349 and the carbonyl oxygen of the R2 side chain makes favorable interactions with Asn346 ( Figure 1 and Figure 6 ). Lastly, we modeled the acyl-enzyme complex of BAL29880 without the -SO 3 -2 group ( Figure 7 ). In this energy-minimized model, we docked the carbonyl of BAL29880 into the oxyanion hole of CMY-2 (see Figure 4b ). In this conformation, the oxygen is advantageously positioned to form hydrogen bonds with the protonated Lys67. Rotating the acyl-amide bond, we observe a stabilizing hydrogen bond interaction with Asn152 (Figure 9) ( 44 ). Thus, the inhibitor BAL29880 , like ATM, adopts an arrangement in the acyl-enzyme that primarily exploits contacts with conserved residues (Lys67 and Asn152) of the active site. Despite these similarities, ATM and BAL29880 behave very differently (one a poor substrate and the other an inhibitor). Conclusions We emphasize four important findings arising from this work. Firstly, we demonstrate how a single amino acid change in the Ω loop of CMY-2 can considerably alter MICs, modify the spectrum of substrate hydrolysis, and vary the efficacy of β-lactamase inhibitors. In this context, we argue that in “class C ESBLs”, movement of the Ω loop and repositioning of key amino acids may be the structural explanation of the phenotypic and kinetic properties. In contrast to the findings in class A ESBLs, the major impact of this substitution is to constrain rather than expand or disorder the Ω loop and active site cavity ( 20 , 45 , 46 ). Here, the inherently larger space in the WT CMY-2 enzyme active site, that is optimally configured to hydrolyze narrow-spectrum cephalosporin substrates, appears to be tailored in CMY-32 to also accommodate CTX and ATM. Secondly, comparing our analysis to other class C β-lactamases that are also considered “extended-spectrum” types, we see that amino acid substitutions at multiple positions, additions, and deletions all give rise to this ESBL phenotype in class C β-lactamases ( 15 , 47 , 48 ). Among class A enzymes, the number and types of changes able to confer ESBL phenotype are limited ( 18 ). Hence, we predict that there will be even more opportunities in class C enzymes to evolve novel catalytic abilities by natural protein engineering. Thirdly, we propose a novel mechanism for the interaction of class C β-lactamases with monobactam substrates and inhibitors. One wonders if the elimination of the -SO 3 -2 group from both ATM and the BAL29880 facilitates hydrolysis or serves to further stabilize the acyl-enzyme complex and result in a long lived terminal species. We also do not know if this phenomenon is unique to CMY type β-lactamases ( 49 ). In NMC-A, a similar pattern was seen by Mourey et al studying monobactam inhibitors ( 49 ). Lastly, we observed in this class C serine β-lactamase that the formation of the acyl-enzyme intermediates of carbapenems is accompanied by fragmentation of the substrate with loss of the hydroxyethyl substituent at the C6 position. This seems to be a property of CMY- and ADC-type class C β-lactamases. As we contemplate these major conclusions, we are certain that the complexity of β-lactamases and the mechanisms responsible for β-lactamase mediated resistance will continue to pose significant challenges to our understanding of the nature and the evolution of protein structure-function relationships in the years ahead. Our study into the mechanism of inactivation by monobactams and carbapenems form templates for the future rationale design of new inhibitors of this class of enzymes.

## IMPACT OF GLY214GLU SUBSTITUTION ON PHENOTYPE
The phenotype we observed because of the Gly214Glu substitution is very reminiscent of class A ESBLs in E. coli and illustrates that in class C β-lactamases, a rather specific substitution located in the Ω loop that alters susceptibility and resistance to many β-lactams. Most strikingly, resistance to CTX and ATM is increased for E. coli bearing CMY-32 compared to CMY-2. In contrast, the class C CMY-32 β-lactamase expressed in E. coli DH10B resulted in a lower level of resistance to cefoxitin, as compared to CMY-2. Moreover, there is increased susceptibility to β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations and carbapenems. These properties are the “clinical hallmarks” that alert microbiology laboratories to the presence of ESBLs in E. coli , K. pneumoniae , and Proteus spp. Interestingly, there are many class A ESBLs of the TEM, SHV families that possess substitutions in the Ω loop that behave similarly ( 18 , 21 ).

## IMPACT OF GLY214GLU ON TURNOVER OF GOOD AND POOR SUBSTRATES
The steady-state kinetic parameters of both CMY-2 and CMY-32 pAmpCs were consistent with the antimicrobial susceptibility profiles. First, we saw an overall reduction in k cat /K m for first-generation cephalosporins (i.e., cephaloridine and cephalothin), substrates that are generally “preferred” by class C enzymes ( 7 ). Likewise, cefoxitin, a 7-α-methoxy cephalosporin, which is usually hydrolyzed by AmpCs, has a 45% reduction in k cat / K m when hydrolyzed by CMY-32. Most strikingly, CMY-32 exhibits the ability to hydrolyze CTX ( k c at / K m = 0.22 μM -1 s -1 for CMY-32 compared to not measurable for CMY-2, see Table 2 and Supporting Information, Figure 1 ). Consistent with the kinetic behavior of other class C enzymes, CMY-2 and CMY-32 hydrolyzes imipenem poorly ( k cat not measurable). Following the reaction with timed ESI-MS, we see that imipenem accumulates in the unfragmented acyl-enzyme form for both CMY pAmpCs ( Figure 2 ). We observed this phenomenon only when the ratio of imipenem to CMYs was 1,000:1. Reducing the ratio to 20:1, we noted identical patterns with all three carbapenems. After the covalent adduct is formed, there is fragmentation to an acyl-enzyme species that is 44 Da less ( Figure 2 ). Similar results were observed with meropenem and doripenem. As previously observed for a chromosomal class A β-lactamase expressed by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the ADC-7 P-lactamase of Acinetobacter baumannii , these results suggest that, after β-lactam ring opening, the covalently bound carbapenem inactivation pathway splits between: i) direct hydrolysis with formation of unfragmented acyl-enzyme; ii) cleavage of the hydroxyethyl substituent ( 39 , 40 ). Investigations are underway to define the impact of this finding and identify of the residues that may facilitate this process.

## IMPACT OF GLY214GLU ON Β-LACTAMASE INHIBITORS
For CMY-32, the Gly214Glu substitution lowers the K i for all clinically used inhibitors (the most dramatic change was for tazobactam and sulbactam), and significantly increases the k inact , a property that is also very common among class A ESBLs ( 1 ). Timed ESI-MS showed that both sulfone inhibitors follow a pattern of inhibition that generates the same postulated intermediates for both AmpCs (i.e., Δ=+88, the hydrated aldehyde and Δ=+72, the aldehyde). Originally, this was described for class A β-lactamases and CMY-2 ( 17 , 41 ). As sulbactam is regarded as a very poor inhibitor of class C enzymes ( K i > 100 μM), we were surprised to see adducts similar to those formed by tazobactam, a more effective inhibitor. Therefore, we maintain that even these class C serine β-lactamases pass through the imine and enamine transitional stages and that CMY-32 may form certain intermediates more readily than CMY-2. We stress that these findings also shed significant insight into why tazobactam serves as a good inhibitor of CMY β-lactamases, albeit unrecognized as such. Our data show that tazobactm possesses a first order rate constant of inactivation ( k inact ) for CMY-32 that was three fold greater than commercially available inhibitors. Together with the lower K i , the more rapid inactivation adds to the potency of the β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations.

## AZTREONAM AND
BAL29880 , a monobactam substrate and a monobactam inactivator The most intriguing observations were made with ATM and BAL29880 . We generally regard ATM as a “poor substrate” and BAL29880 is an inhibitor. As result of the Gly214Glu substitution, CMY-32 expressed in E. coli has increased MICs against aztreonam. In contrast, BAL29880 does not appear to possess antibacterial activity (MICs > 32 μg/mL for E. coli with CMY-2 and CMY-32 β-lactamases). However, when combined with ampicillin or piperacillin, BAL29880 lowers MICs at least 6-twofold dilutions (≥ 256 to ≤ 4 μg/mL), a range similar to ATM alone against CMY-2 and CMY-32 ( Table 1 ). To understand why two monobactams behave so differently, we performed direct competition experiments using NCF as an indicator substrate and studied the reactions using timed ESI-MS. Here, ATM showed 30- to 55-fold greater affinity for CMY-2 and CMY-32 when compared to BAL29880 ( Table 2 and 3 ). This compelled us to explore possible mechanisms by which ATM and BAL29880 interact with CMY-2 and CMY-32. Timed ESI-MS analysis demonstrated that BAL29880 and ATM follow similar pathways of inhibition against both CMY-2 and CMY-32 pAmpCs ( Figure 3 ). Both monobactams acylate the CMY β-lactamases (i.e., Δ=+411 Da for BAL29880 or Δ=+435 Da for ATM) and form long-lived acyl enzymes. These findings were reminiscent of Oefner et al. who demonstrated that ATM, a poor substrate, acylates the active site Ser64 of the C. freundii AmpC β-lactamase (PDB, 1FR1), an enzyme with 97% amino acid homology to CMY-2 and CMY-32 ( 42 ). Therefore, we anticipated the presence of the full adduct added to CMY-2 and CMY-32 when ATM and BAL29880 were reacted with these class C cephalosporinases ( 42 , 43 ). Unexpectedly, we discovered that a second adduct was also formed. The MW of the second adduct is approximately 70 Da less than the first, suggesting that both monobactams undergo fragmentation after acylation of the CMY β-lactamase ( Figure 3 ). Mechanistically, the addition of water to the acyl-enzyme species would allow hydrolysis of the sulfonamide to yield the free sulfate ( Figure 4a and 4b ).

## MOLECULAR MODELS
In order to explain the basis of affinity and specificity of the Gly214Glu substitution in the Ω loop of CMY-2, we constructed three molecular models. In the first model, we superimposed the energy minimized structures of CMY-32 and CMY-2 (rmsd = 1.0 Å) using backbone atoms and compared the conformation of the active sites paying particular attention to the Ω loop region (Val211 to Val223) ( Figure 5a and 5b ). The analysis of the trajectories generated after MDS showed an average potential movement of 1-3 Å in the region of Gly214Glu substitution. Our model shows that there is also significant change in the position of the Tyr221 side chain in the CMY-32 β-lactamase ( Figure 5b ). As result of the Gly to Glu substitution, Tyr221 likely moves within hydrogen bond distance to Glu214 (1.9 Å, Figure 5b ). Our interpretation is that this newly positioned hydrogen bond limits the overall flexibility and mobility of the Ω loop. Additionally, we observed that because of the Glu214-Tyr221 hydrogen bond, Gln120 adopts a new conformation in which the side chain is flipped more than 3.5 Å (see Figure 6 ). In our second model, we present an explanation of why CTX is hydrolyzed by CMY-32 β-lactamase. Using the energy-minimized structure of CMY-32, we docked the carbonyl of the 4-member ring of CTX in the oxyanion hole ( Figure 6 ). Because of the repositioning of Gln120 in CMY-32, we see a new hydrogen bond contact between Glu120:O and the terminal amide of the R1 side chain of CTX. In this model, the C4 carboxylate is in hydrogen bond distance with Arg349 and the carbonyl oxygen of the R2 side chain makes favorable interactions with Asn346 ( Figure 1 and Figure 6 ). Lastly, we modeled the acyl-enzyme complex of BAL29880 without the -SO 3 -2 group ( Figure 7 ). In this energy-minimized model, we docked the carbonyl of BAL29880 into the oxyanion hole of CMY-2 (see Figure 4b ). In this conformation, the oxygen is advantageously positioned to form hydrogen bonds with the protonated Lys67. Rotating the acyl-amide bond, we observe a stabilizing hydrogen bond interaction with Asn152 (Figure 9) ( 44 ). Thus, the inhibitor BAL29880 , like ATM, adopts an arrangement in the acyl-enzyme that primarily exploits contacts with conserved residues (Lys67 and Asn152) of the active site. Despite these similarities, ATM and BAL29880 behave very differently (one a poor substrate and the other an inhibitor).

## CONCLUSIONS
We emphasize four important findings arising from this work. Firstly, we demonstrate how a single amino acid change in the Ω loop of CMY-2 can considerably alter MICs, modify the spectrum of substrate hydrolysis, and vary the efficacy of β-lactamase inhibitors. In this context, we argue that in “class C ESBLs”, movement of the Ω loop and repositioning of key amino acids may be the structural explanation of the phenotypic and kinetic properties. In contrast to the findings in class A ESBLs, the major impact of this substitution is to constrain rather than expand or disorder the Ω loop and active site cavity ( 20 , 45 , 46 ). Here, the inherently larger space in the WT CMY-2 enzyme active site, that is optimally configured to hydrolyze narrow-spectrum cephalosporin substrates, appears to be tailored in CMY-32 to also accommodate CTX and ATM. Secondly, comparing our analysis to other class C β-lactamases that are also considered “extended-spectrum” types, we see that amino acid substitutions at multiple positions, additions, and deletions all give rise to this ESBL phenotype in class C β-lactamases ( 15 , 47 , 48 ). Among class A enzymes, the number and types of changes able to confer ESBL phenotype are limited ( 18 ). Hence, we predict that there will be even more opportunities in class C enzymes to evolve novel catalytic abilities by natural protein engineering. Thirdly, we propose a novel mechanism for the interaction of class C β-lactamases with monobactam substrates and inhibitors. One wonders if the elimination of the -SO 3 -2 group from both ATM and the BAL29880 facilitates hydrolysis or serves to further stabilize the acyl-enzyme complex and result in a long lived terminal species. We also do not know if this phenomenon is unique to CMY type β-lactamases ( 49 ). In NMC-A, a similar pattern was seen by Mourey et al studying monobactam inhibitors ( 49 ). Lastly, we observed in this class C serine β-lactamase that the formation of the acyl-enzyme intermediates of carbapenems is accompanied by fragmentation of the substrate with loss of the hydroxyethyl substituent at the C6 position. This seems to be a property of CMY- and ADC-type class C β-lactamases. As we contemplate these major conclusions, we are certain that the complexity of β-lactamases and the mechanisms responsible for β-lactamase mediated resistance will continue to pose significant challenges to our understanding of the nature and the evolution of protein structure-function relationships in the years ahead. Our study into the mechanism of inactivation by monobactams and carbapenems form templates for the future rationale design of new inhibitors of this class of enzymes.

## SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
1_si_001
