PMID: 26745529
PMCID: PMC4706643
DOI: 10.1016/j.str.2015.10.015
Title: Structural Basis for Latency and Function of Immune Inhibitor A Metallopeptidase, a Modulator of the Bacillus anthracis Secretome.
Journal: Structure (London, England : 1993)
PubDate: 2016 Jan 5
Authors: Arolas JL, Goulas T, Pomerantsev AP, Leppla SH, Gomis-Rüth FX
Source: PMC_EFetch_XML
License: pmc_free_to_read

## ABSTRACT
SUMMARY Immune inhibitor A(InhA)-type metallopeptidases are potential virulence factors secreted by members of the Bacillus cereus group. Two paralogs from anthrax-causing Bacillus anthracis ( Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2) were shown to degrade host tissue proteins with broad substrate specificity. Analysis of their activation mechanism and the crystal structure of a zymogenic Ba InhA2 variant revealed a ~750-residue four-domain structure featuring a pro-peptide, a catalytic domain, a domain reminiscent of viral envelope glycoproteins, and a MAM domain grafted into the latter. This domain, previously found only in eukaryotes, is required for proper protein expression in B. anthracis and evinces certain flexibility. Latency is uniquely modulated by the N-terminal segment of the pro-peptide, which binds the catalytic zinc through its α-amino group and occupies the primed side of the active-site cleft. The present results further our understanding of the modus operandi of an anthrax secretome regulator. Graphical Abstract

## INTRODUCTION
Bacillus anthracis is a facultative anaerobic Gram-positive spore-forming bacterium that belongs to the Bacillus cereus group (BCG) of Bacillales ( Rasko et al., 2005 ). In 1876, Robert Koch identified it as the etiologic agent of anthrax ( Koch, 1876 ), an ancient disease believed to have originated in Egypt and Mesopotamia around 1250 b.c., which might have been among the ten plagues of Egypt ( Sternbach, 2003 ). Anthrax is an acute, rapidly progressing infectious disease that affects humans and other animals ( Baillie and Read, 2001 ), and infection occurs through the spores, which produce three clinical pictures depending on the entry pathway: cutaneous, inhalational or gastrointestinal anthrax. The former leads to skin ulcers, which are generally easy to treat. In contrast, inhalational and gastrointestinal anthrax are invasive and systemic, and often fatal. Accordingly, novel therapeutic approaches targeting B. anthracis are of importance and currently under investigation ( Artenstein and Opal, 2012 ). In addition to the major virulence factors of B. anthracis identified , viz. the plasmid-encoded anthrax toxin and the poly-D-glutamic acid capsule, other proteins contribute to virulence and disease, and may provide targets for therapy against anthrax ( Artenstein and Opal, 2012 ). Among candidate virulence factors are immune inhibitor A (InhA) peptidases, which belong to the thuringilysin family within the metzincin clan of metallopeptidases (MPs) ( Cerdà-Costa and Gomis-Rüth, 2014 ). They have also been ascribed to family M6 in the MEROPS proteolytic enzyme database ( http://merops.sanger.ac.uk ). Metzincins are characterized by ~130–270-residue globular catalytic domains (CD), which consists of a structurally conserved N-terminal upper sub-domain (NTS) and a lower structurally more disparate C-terminal sub-domain (CTS). The two sub-domains are separated by the active-site cleft. NTSs span a (mostly) five-stranded β-sheet, a “backing helix,” and an “active-site helix”, which contains an extended metal-binding motif, H E XX H XX(G,N)XX( H,D ). This motif encompasses three metal-binding residues ( in bold ) and the catalytic general base/acid glutamate ( in italics ) required for reaction. Some metzincins also include an additional “adamalysin helix”, first described in adamalysins/ADAMs ( Cerdà-Costa and Gomis-Rüth, 2014 ). Downstream CTSs mainly share a conserved loop with a central methionine—the “Met-turn”—, which provides a hydrophobic basis for the metal-binding site ( Tallant et al., 2010 ), and a “C-terminal helix.” Among the 12 metzincin families structurally characterized are the toxilysins ( Cerdà-Costa and Gomis-Rüth, 2014 ; Gomis-Rüth, 2013 ; Ng et al., 2013 ), which are part of the bacterial AB 5 toxins ( Beddoe et al., 2010 ). Like the protective antigen and lethal factor tandem in B. anthracis anthrax toxin, AB 5 toxins from Escherichia coli (EcxAB) and Citrobacter freundii (CfxAB) consist of a subunit for host-cell invasion (pentameric subunit B) and an active MP that subverts intracellular functions (subunit A)( Beddoe et al., 2010 ). The thuringilysins are one of the oldest known MP families, as the founding member, InhA1 from Bacillus thuringiensis , was identified in the middle 1970s as an immune inhibitor that interferes with the humoral defense system of saturniid pupae in the hemolymph by degrading antibacterial insect proteins ( Edlund et al., 1976 ). Close homologs with >60% pairwise sequence identity, including InhA1, InhA2 and InhA3 paralogs, are found within BCG members ( Charlton et al., 1999 ), and a possible explanation for this paralogy seems to be complementary expression patterns during the distinct stages of the Bacillus life cycle ( Guillemet et al., 2010 ). Slightly more distant thuringilysin family members ( Gomis-Rüth, 2003 ) include PrtV peptidases from several Vibrio species—including human pathogenic Vibrio cholerae ( Vc PrtV; ( Vaitkevicius et al., 2008 )) and Vibrio parahaemolyticus —, which show >40% sequence identity with Bacillus counterparts ( Fig. 1A ). Among thuringilysins are also InhA1 and InhA2 from B. anthracis ( Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2, respectively). They are synthesized as pre-pro-peptidases of 795 and 799 residues, respectively (69% sequence identity; Fig. 1B ), with signal peptides (SPs) for secretion of the zymogenic forms. Extracellular activation of the latter prevents damage to the bacterium. In general, the transcription levels of inhA1 are 50–100 times higher than those of inhA2 , which can be explained by the presence of a PlcR-binding site upstream of the promoter region of the latter gene ( McKenzie et al., 2014 ). Ba InhA1 is highly abundant in supernatants of cultures grown either under aerobic or anaerobic conditions ( Chitlaru et al., 2006 ), which can be found in soil environment or within mammalian host tissues during infection. Ba InhA1 modulates, directly or indirectly, the form and abundance of over half the secreted proteins of B. anthracis ( Pflughoeft et al., 2014 ). In addition, it participates in nutrient acquisition by digesting host-serum proteins like hemoglobin ( Terwilliger et al., 2015 ). As to its function as a candidate virulence factor, Ba InhA1 contributes to anthrax pathology through direct degradation of host tissues: it cleaves various extracellular matrix proteins ( Chung et al., 2006 ), regulates adhesion in human endothelial cells ( Tonry et al., 2012 ), and increases the blood-brain barrier disruption associated with anthrax meningitis ( Mukherjee et al., 2011 ). This MP also affects the coagulation cascade by degrading thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor, von Willebrand factor, plasma ADAMTS-13, prothrombin, and factor X, among others ( Chung et al., 2011 ). To better understand the function of thuringilysins, we examined activation and proteolytic activity of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 peptidases in vitro and found both were competent MPs of broad specificity against proteins and peptides. We further determined the crystal structure of the Ba InhA2 zymogen, which revealed four distinct domains and a novel mechanism of latency among MPs. Taken together, these data contribute to shed light on latency, activation, and activity of the peptidase family and, thus, lay the foundation for specific drug design against anthrax.

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Recombinant production and autolytic activation of B. anthracis InhA1/A2 peptidases Heterologous expression trials of several constructs in E. coli (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures [SEP] ) yielded insoluble protein under all conditions tested. We circumvented this problem by producing full-length Ba InhA1 (84 kDa; residues E 32 —R 795 ; UniProt database access [UP] code Q81TI0 ; residues numbered in subscript) and Ba InhA2 (85 kDa; residues E 33 —R 799 ; UP D8H130; residues numbered in superscript) lacking the predicted endogenous SPs in a Bacillus subtilis strain deficient in eight proteases with a vector that provides a Bacillus SP for extracellular secretion instead. Recombinant wild-type (wt) Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 underwent fast stepwise processing ( Fig. 2A ). This was strongly diminished in Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 active-site mutants, in which the catalytic glutamates were replaced by alanine, thus resulting in residual activity only (E/A mutants; Fig. 2A ); and completely abolished in a double point mutant affecting both the catalytic glutamate and a zinc-binding histidine of Ba InhA1, which was inactive (HE/AA mutant; Fig. 2A ). This indicated that processing was autolytic, as previously described for other recombinant bacterial MPs upon purification and concentration, such as karilysin from Tannerella forsythia ( Cerdà-Costa et al., 2011 ), fragilysin-3 from Bacteroides fragilis ( Goulas et al., 2011 ), and snapalysin from Streptomyces coelicolor ( Trillo-Muyo et al., 2013 ). Analysis of purified Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 by SDS-PAGE, combined with N-terminal sequencing and mass spectrometry (see SEP), revealed several species spanning between 18 and 84/85 kDa ( Ba InhA1/ Ba InhA2; Fig. 2A, B ). In particular, the latter species (➀ in Fig. 2A, C ), with disordered N-terminal segments as predicted by bioinformatics and indicated by small-angle X-ray scattering studies (SAXS) in solution (see below), were transformed over time into stable zymogens (➁ in Fig. 2A, C ) after cleavage before H 46 and N 50 , respectively. This was the form that crystallized for Ba InhA2 (see below). A second series of cleavages removed the zymogenic pro-peptides (H 46 —A 129 and N 50 —E 133 , respectively; for reference, mature purified Ba InhA1 starts at T 130 ; ( Chung et al., 2006 ); see Fig. 2A, C ) plus some extra residues of the mature moiety. This led to the single-chain mature forms (➂ in Fig. 2A, C ), which were equivalent to purified natural Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2, respectively. Finally, subsequent cleavages—most notably one before V 630 and V 634 , respectively ( Fig. 2A, C )—resulted in the final mature forms, which consisted of two non-covalently associated fragments of 46/55 kDa ( Ba InhA1/ Ba InhA2) and 18 kDa (➃ and ➄, plus ➅ in Fig. 2A, C ). The two fragments that build up the final mature forms (46+18 kDa in Ba InhA1, consistent with purified protein from B. anthracis extracts, see ( Chung et al., 2006 ); and 55+18 kDa in Ba InhA2) separated in SDS-PAGE but not in size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), i.e. they strongly but non-covalently associated. The activation of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2, however, may follow a heterolytic mechanism in vivo triggered by other secreted bacterial peptidases or host peptidases at the site of infection. Indeed, limited proteolysis of Ba InhA1 E/A mutant with trypsin, chymotrypsin, and thermolysin likewise resulted in pro-peptide removal ( Fig. 2D ).). Importantly, the final mature forms obtained from B. subtilis evinced a well-folded conformation as assessed by circular dichroism, which showed similar spectra and denaturation for both Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 ( Fig. 2E ). Their stability in front of denaturation was further examined by the thermofluor approach, which revealed no dye binding to the former and a temperature of midtransition ( T m ) of 52 °C for the latter ( Fig. 2F ). Proteolytic activity and inhibition of B. anthracis InhA1/A2 Mature recombinant Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 efficiently digested natural protein substrates including casein, fibrinogen, fibronectin, actin, and gelatin, but not bovine serum albumin or α-lactalbumin, which is a highly stable multi-disulfide protein ( Fig. 3A ). Ba InhA1 further digested β-lactoglobulin and, noteworthy, the major structural component of the mucus, MUC2 mucin, which covers and protects the epithelium of the intestine from bacteria ( Johansson et al., 2013 ). MUC2 mucin was cleaved with a profile similar to that of the human intestinal MP meprin β (compare Fig. 3A , lower right and Fig. 2 in ( Schutte et al., 2014 )). Thus, Ba InhA1 could have a role in the disruption of the dense gel that mucins form permitting anthrax to overcome this gastrointestinal barrier and attack the intestinal epithelium during infection. Ba InhA1 further digested authentic triple-helical collagen at multiple sites like a bona-fide collagenase, thus breaking down a structural protein that may be crucial to all three anthrax infection processes. Ba InhA1 was more active than Ba InhA2 against all protein substrates analyzed. This also held for fluorogenic casein and gelatin, which were cleaved by Ba InhA1 ~5-fold more efficiently than by Ba InhA2 ( Fig. 3C ). Wt Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were also overproduced extracellularly by a B. anthracis strain deficient in six proteases ( Pomerantsev et al., 2011 ), and they showed equivalent activity to that of the proteins expressed in B. subtilis on fluorogenic casein ( Fig. 2C and Fig. S1A, D ). As to peptidolytic activity, Ba InhA1 cleaved peptide Mca-R-P-K-P-V-E-Nva-W-R-K(dnp)-NH 2 with high efficiency and Mca-P-L-A-Nva-Dap(dnp)-A-R-NH 2 less efficiently, whereas Ba InhA2 only digested the former. The rest of peptides tested were not affected with the exception of Abz-V-K-F-Y-D-I-K(dnp), which was digested by Ba InhA1, thus suggesting broad specificity, in particular against peptides. In addition, both B. anthracis proteins displayed maximum proteolytic activity at pH6.5 ( Fig. 3D ), which slightly deviates from previous results with purified Ba InhA1 (pH7–8; ( Chung et al., 2006 )). The MPs were inhibited only by general MP inhibitors—but not by specific inhibitors of other MPs or peptidase classes ( Table S2 )—and by the universal pan-peptidase inhibitor α 2 -macroglobulin ( Fig. 3B ). Accordingly, recombinant Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were competent MPs, which showed overall broad cleavage specificity against proteins and peptides, as also found during autolytic activation (see above) and in natural purified Ba InhA1 protein ( Chung et al., 2006 ). This broad specificity is consistent with the function of Ba InhA1 in the B. anthracis secretome, where it digests not only endogenous toxins (protein antigen, lethal factor and edema factor) and other peptidases (thermolysin Npr599), but also multiple chitinases and chitin binding proteins which enable bacteria to thrive in the soil ( Pflughoeft et al., 2014 ). Overall structure of B. anthracis InhA2 zymogen A number of constructs and mutants of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were assayed for crystallization but only Ba InhA2 E/A-mutant zymogen (hereafter pro- Ba InhA2-E/A) crystallized adequately for structure analysis. However, given the high sequence identity between the two paralogs (69 %; see Fig. 1B ), the structure-derived findings hereafter may be valid for both. The structure was solved by a two-wavelength MAD experiment with a selenomethionine derivative, and final models were obtained and refined against derivative data to 2.9 Å and native data to 2.6 Å resolution, respectively (see Table 1 ). Overall, structural information is available for two molecules (A and B) from the native crystals and two from the derivative (A and B). Given that molecule A of the native structure is the most complete of the four (see SEP), it is taken as a reference hereafter. This molecule spans the full segment N 50 -R 799 and displays maximal overall dimensions of 70 Å(height) × 85 Å(width) × 65 Å(depth)( Fig. 4A, B ). It consists of four domains: the N-terminal pro-peptide (N 50 —E 133 ), a metzincin-type CD (Q 134 -A 442 ), a VEG domain (K 443 —P 480 +H 644 —R 799 ; for acronym explanation, see below), and a domain previously described in m eprin α and β, A 5 protein, and receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase μ (MAM; G 481 -A 643 ), grafted into VEG (see Fig. 4C ). Pro-peptide and catalytic domain of pro-BaInhA2-E/A The polypeptide chain starts on the primed side of the active-site cleft with N 50 , the first of the 85-residue pro-peptide. The chain runs in extended conformation along the cleft in the direction of a true substrate for its first four residues ( Fig. 4D, E ). Thereafter, the chain features a small globular moiety framed by two helices (α1 and α2; see Fig. 1B ). After helix α2, the polypeptide runs across the non-primed side of the cleft and reaches helix α3 at its leftmost end. This helix runs downward along the left molecular surface and reaches the final maturation cleavage point (E 133 -Q 134 ) in the lower back part of the molecule, on top of the VEG domain (see below and Fig. 4D ). This segment, including α3, is flexible and mostly absent (from G 89 -E 95 to P 132 -L 143 ) in the other three molecules of the two structures analyzed. At Q 134 , the chain enters the CD (see Fig. 4A–C ), which with 309 residues is the longest of any metzincin described to date and is sub-divisible into an NTS (Q 134 —G 386 ) and a CTS (L 387 —A 442 ; see Fig. 4C ). The first 22 residues of the NTS creep upwards along the back molecular surface interacting with the VEG domain. At R 162 , the polypeptide enters the first strand (β1) of the metzincin-characteristic five-stranded β-sheet (top to bottom, β4+β5↑—β1↑—β6↑—β9↑—β7↓). Downmost strand β7 is antiparallel to the others and creates the upper rim of the active-site cleft, which has a slightly electronegative character ( Fig. 4E ). In metzincins, a backing helix connects the strands topologically equivalent to β1 and β4+β5. Here, this helix is divided into two (α4 and α5) by a protrusion of the polypeptide featuring a β-ribbon (strands β2 and β3), which contributes to the right back surface. Additional elements decorate the central NTS β-sheet. Among these, an adamalysin helix (α7) nestles on top of the β-sheet and connects β4+β5 with β6. Helix α7 is preceded by a short upstream helix α6 and loop (A 252 —G 265 ), which contributes to a calcium site (“Site 1”) together with Lβ6β7 (G 317 —S 334 ; Fig. 5A ). These two loops constitute a bulge, which protrudes from the molecular surface above the cleft on its primed side. Downstream of helix α7, a long loop (G 281 —H 310 ) includes 3 10 -helix η1 and shapes the left side of the molecule. This loop, hereafter the “calcium-binding loop,” is stabilized by two vicinal calcium cations separated by 10 Å (“Site 2”; see Fig. 5B ), which is reminiscent of the double calcium site found in the pappalysin-family member ulilysin within metzincins ( Tallant et al., 2006 ). Stability provided by calcium was already suggested for B. thuringiensis InhA1 ( Lövgren et al., 1990 ) and was verified here for Ba InhA2 by thermal-shift experiments ( Fig. 2F ). The calcium-binding loop and the adamalysin helix surround loop Lβ7β9, which includes short strand β8—it interacts with the beginning of β9—, on the upper surface of the molecule. After strand β9, the chain enters active-site helix α8, which runs right to left and frames the active-site cleft on its back. Helix α8 contains most of the extended metal-binding motif, which includes zinc-binding residues H 379 and H 383 , and the catalytic glutamate, E 380 , here mutated to alanine (see Fig. 5F ). The NTS-CTS transition is G 386 —L 387 , and the third zinc-binding residue is D 389 from the CTS. Most metzincins have a histidine as third zinc ligand, but aspartates have also been described for snapalysins and igalysins (see ( Cerdà-Costa and Gomis-Rüth, 2014 ) and references therein). Some metzincins like snapalysin and igalysin have a tyrosine two positions downstream of the third ligand, which may play a role in substrate binding and catalysis. It is also present in pro- Ba InhA2-E/A as Y 391 . Overall, the CTS is much smaller than the NTS (56 vs. 253 residues) and also encompasses a Met-turn typical for metzincins—centered on M 408 —and a C-terminal helix (α9), which leads to the end of the CD at A 442 . Similarity searches with Ba InhA2 CD identified the MPs ADAM-17 (PDB 3CKI; ( Maskos et al., 1998 ); Fig. S2A ) and ulilysin (PDB 2CKI; ( Tallant et al., 2006 )) as closest structural relatives, in agreement with their ascription to the metzincins ( Cerdà-Costa and Gomis-Rüth, 2014 ). The VEG domain of pro-BaInhA2-E/A After leaving the CD, the polypeptide enters an elaborate β domain, which is reminiscent of the principal v iral e nvelope g lycoprotein from dengue virus (PDB 3UC0; ( Cockburn et al., 2012 ); see Fig. S2B ) and is hereafter dubbed “VEG domain” (K 443 —P 480 +H 644 —R 799 ). The VEG domain consists of a central parallel β-sandwich (see Fig. 4A–C ) made up by an upper five-stranded mixed sheet (β10↓—β12↓—β29↑—β30↓—β31+β34↑) and a lower four-stranded antiparallel sheet (β11↑—β39↓—β38↑—β37↓). This central sandwich is decorated with a β-ribbon, perpendicularly grafted after the rightmost strand of the upper sheet and created by β35+β36 with the beginning of strand β37 from the lower sheet. In addition, β35+β36 is interrupted by an insertion that comprises helix α10, a β-ribbon (β32β33) and a calcium site (“Site 3”; see Fig. 5C ). In addition, 3 10 -helix η3 is grafted onto the upper sheet between the second and third strands from the right, and loop Lη3β30 might contribute to shaping the rightmost edge of the active-site cleft. The VEG domain is attached to the bottom of the CTS (see Fig. 4A–C ), mainly through its upper sheet, through an interface spanning 1,610 Å 2 . In addition, VEG contacts the N-terminal segment (see above) and the end of α5 plus the downstream loop of NTS. The MAM domain of pro-BaInhA2-E/A Grafted between the second and third strands of the upper sheet of VEG ( Fig. 4C ), a second β domain is laterally attached. It displays closest structural similarity with MAM domains, such as the one from the human MP, meprin β (PDB 4QWM; ( Arolas et al., 2012 ); see Fig. S2C ), grafted between two domains. The pro- Ba InhA2-E/A MAM domain is a β-sandwich consisting of two five-stranded antiparallel β-sheets rotated away from each other by ~25° (see Fig. 4A–C ). The sandwich consists of a back twisted sheet (β19—β18—β22—β15+β16—β26) and a front twisted and curled sheet (β20+β21—β17—β23+β24—β25+β14—β27). It is decorated by 3 10 -helix η2 after β21, a calcium site (“Site 4”) embraced by Lβ17β18 and Lβ22β23 (see Fig. 5D ), and a β-ribbon (β13β28) included in the segments in extended conformation connecting the MAM and VEG domains. In addition, a tentative sodium site (“Site 5”) is shaped by Lβ13β14, Lβ23β24 and Lβ25β26 (see Fig. 5E ). While the overall architecture—including the sodium sites—of pro- Ba InhA2-E/A MAM and meprin β MAM are conserved, their respective insertion into the overall multi-domain moieties is circularly permutated and occurs through different regions (see Fig. S2C ). Function of the MAM domain MAM domains were initially predicted by bioinformatics, and although their function is unknown, they have been found in cell-surface eukaryotic proteins only and may function as interaction or adhesion domains ( Beckmann and Bork, 1993 ). To explore their role in thuringilysins, we designed several MAM-deleted variants of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 (see Table S1 ). Interestingly, all variants were insoluble or not expressed at all in production assays with E. coli and B. subtilis as hosts, respectively. Production in B. anthracis to more closely mimic their natural environment yielded forms that lacked most of the C-terminal VEG domains and were inactive ( Fig. 3C and Fig. S1A–C ). Removal of these C-terminal parts is likely caused by heterolytic cleavage since the B. anthracis strain used for protein expression lacks MPs but not proteases from other catalytic types ( Pomerantsev et al., 2011 ). Overall, these results implicate the MAM domain in folding and/or stability of InhA peptidases, which affects susceptibility to (heterolytic) proteolysis. Flexibility of the VEG-MAM linkage Analysis of molecular flexibility of native and selenomethione-derivatized pro- Ba InhA2-E/A (respective molecules A and B) based on the elastic network model indicated two independent rigid bodies for the pro-peptide+CD+VEG and the MAM moieties separately. P 480 -G 481 and A 643 -H 644 were identified as hinge points, around which rearrangement though rigid-body rotation would occur. Superposition of the four crystallographic molecules based on the respective CD+VEG moieties revealed that MAM domains are rearranged but only maximally for ~15 Å in both the horizontal and the vertical planes (see Fig. 6A ). Maximal displacement in the vertical plane was observed for molecule A of the native structure. This correlated with the segment connecting the globular domain of the pro-peptide with the beginning of the CD being mostly ordered in the final model, in contrast to the other three molecules (see above). The overall flexibility of the VEG-MAM junction was further analyzed in solution by SAXS using Ba InhA1-HE/AA. This was the only full-length protein variant assayed that was stable enough over time—as assessed by SDS-PAGE (see Fig. 2A ) and dynamic light scattering (DLS)—and revealed a homogenous protein solution (polydispersity <15 %). The SAXS experimental curve indicated an essentially globular protein, and best fitting of the experimental data was obtained when the N-terminus of the crystallized protein (E 33 —I 52 ) was modeled as completely flexible (see Fig. 6B ). The fit, however, did not improve significantly when including the relative arrangement between VEG and MAM as found in the four crystal structures. Accordingly, the hinge between these domains accounts for a certain degree of rotational freedom but not complete flexibility. Zymogenic and activity determinants in pro-BaInhA2-E/A Latency is maintained in pro- Ba InhA2-E/A through the pro-peptide, which wraps around and interacts with the mature enzyme moiety through a large surface of 3,450 Å 2 ( Fig. 4D ). Regions involved include practically the entire pro-peptide and Lα6α7, Lη1β6, Lβ6β7, β7, Lβ7β8, Lα8α9 and α9 of the CD; Lβ14β15 and β22 of the MAM domain; and β36 and the following loop of the VEG domain. The globular moiety of the pro-peptide is attached on the right side of the active-site cleft (see Fig. 4A, C ) and introduces the preceding segment N 50 -Q 53 in the primed side of the cleft, thus mimicking a left-behind cleavage product and blocking substrate access (see Fig. 5F ). The α-amino group of N 50 contacts the catalytic zinc ion by a zinc-NH 2 coordinative bond. With this ligand and the three zinc ligands from the extended metal-binding motif (see above) plus a tentative acetonitrile molecule from the crystallization solution, the metal adopts a trigonal-bipyramidal coordination. The N 50 main chain is further bound through a double interaction with Y 391 Oη, which substantiates a possible role in substrate binding during catalysis as in related MPs (see above). The side chain of N 50 , in turn, points into the S 1 ’ pocket, which is generally a structural element of substrate selectivity in MPs. Here, the pocket is wide and framed by segment G 410 -W 413 from the segment following the Met-turn, by downstream A 418 -G 419 , and by A 373 -H 379 from the active-site helix. The bottom of the cleft is occupied by S 412 , which binds the side-chain Oδ1 atom of N 50 . Overall, the pocket is shaped to accommodate a variety of side chains, which is compatible with its broad specificity (see above). Downstream of N 50 , the main-chain carbonyl of L 51 binds the side-chain Nε1 atoms of W 413 , the amide nitrogen of I 52 binds Y 395 Oη, and the side chain of Q 53 is sandwiched between the W 413 and Y 187 side chains. A second region of intimate contact between the CD and the pro-peptide is provided by segment G 89 -P 98 of the latter. In particular N 93 approaches the metal binding site interacting with R 336 N from cleft upper-rim strand β7 through its Oδ1 atom, and both zinc-ligand D 389 atom Oδ2 and the catalytic metal through its Nδ2 atom (see Fig. 5F ). Downstream pro-peptide residue E 95 is trapped between the side chains of H 258 , H 335 and R 267 . Taken together, this mechanism of latency through the N-terminus of the zymogen is novel for MPs and is reminiscent of the inhibition mechanism of the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) ( Gomis-Rüth et al., 1997 ), and of serralysin inhibitors ( Baumann et al., 1995 ), which are likewise both inhibited by the N-terminal segment of the inhibitors on the primed side of the respective clefts. Conclusions The present study documents a novel mechanism of latency maintenance in MPs through the N-terminus, which may be shared by other BCG orthologs and paralogs from the thuringilysin family. Sequence analysis of the slightly more distant Vc PrtV ( Fig. S3 ) in the light of the structure of pro- Ba InhA2-E/A ( Fig. S3 ), together with the recently determined NMR structure of its isolated pro-domain ( Edwin et al., 2015 ), point to a very similar general architecture in Vibrio thuringilysins. They possess two additional C-terminal domains in tandem called PKD1 and PKD2, which are believed to participate in protein secretion ( Rompikuntal et al., 2015 ) and should not interfere with the preceding domains (see Fig. S3 ). Accordingly, our conclusions on structure, function, and activation of Ba InhAs may be valid for these relatives, too. InhA and PrtV thuringilysins evince a grafted MAM domain that has a role in proper expression and possibly also in protein function. So far, such domains have been found only in eukaryotes, which suggests that BCG bacteria could have co-opted one through horizontal gene transfer (HGT) during their intimate coexistence with mammalian hosts and integrated it to furnish thuringilysin peptidases. Integration would have occurred under circular permutation of the point of insertion of the MAM domain into preceding/succeeding domains in the respective multi-domain structures. Similar origins through eukaryotic-to-prokaryotic HGT have been postulated for the bacterial MPs fragilysins and karilysin ( Cerdà-Costa et al., 2011 ; Goulas et al., 2011 ).

## RECOMBINANT PRODUCTION AND AUTOLYTIC ACTIVATION OF B. ANTHRACIS INHA1/A2 PEPTIDASES
Heterologous expression trials of several constructs in E. coli (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures [SEP] ) yielded insoluble protein under all conditions tested. We circumvented this problem by producing full-length Ba InhA1 (84 kDa; residues E 32 —R 795 ; UniProt database access [UP] code Q81TI0 ; residues numbered in subscript) and Ba InhA2 (85 kDa; residues E 33 —R 799 ; UP D8H130; residues numbered in superscript) lacking the predicted endogenous SPs in a Bacillus subtilis strain deficient in eight proteases with a vector that provides a Bacillus SP for extracellular secretion instead. Recombinant wild-type (wt) Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 underwent fast stepwise processing ( Fig. 2A ). This was strongly diminished in Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 active-site mutants, in which the catalytic glutamates were replaced by alanine, thus resulting in residual activity only (E/A mutants; Fig. 2A ); and completely abolished in a double point mutant affecting both the catalytic glutamate and a zinc-binding histidine of Ba InhA1, which was inactive (HE/AA mutant; Fig. 2A ). This indicated that processing was autolytic, as previously described for other recombinant bacterial MPs upon purification and concentration, such as karilysin from Tannerella forsythia ( Cerdà-Costa et al., 2011 ), fragilysin-3 from Bacteroides fragilis ( Goulas et al., 2011 ), and snapalysin from Streptomyces coelicolor ( Trillo-Muyo et al., 2013 ). Analysis of purified Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 by SDS-PAGE, combined with N-terminal sequencing and mass spectrometry (see SEP), revealed several species spanning between 18 and 84/85 kDa ( Ba InhA1/ Ba InhA2; Fig. 2A, B ). In particular, the latter species (➀ in Fig. 2A, C ), with disordered N-terminal segments as predicted by bioinformatics and indicated by small-angle X-ray scattering studies (SAXS) in solution (see below), were transformed over time into stable zymogens (➁ in Fig. 2A, C ) after cleavage before H 46 and N 50 , respectively. This was the form that crystallized for Ba InhA2 (see below). A second series of cleavages removed the zymogenic pro-peptides (H 46 —A 129 and N 50 —E 133 , respectively; for reference, mature purified Ba InhA1 starts at T 130 ; ( Chung et al., 2006 ); see Fig. 2A, C ) plus some extra residues of the mature moiety. This led to the single-chain mature forms (➂ in Fig. 2A, C ), which were equivalent to purified natural Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2, respectively. Finally, subsequent cleavages—most notably one before V 630 and V 634 , respectively ( Fig. 2A, C )—resulted in the final mature forms, which consisted of two non-covalently associated fragments of 46/55 kDa ( Ba InhA1/ Ba InhA2) and 18 kDa (➃ and ➄, plus ➅ in Fig. 2A, C ). The two fragments that build up the final mature forms (46+18 kDa in Ba InhA1, consistent with purified protein from B. anthracis extracts, see ( Chung et al., 2006 ); and 55+18 kDa in Ba InhA2) separated in SDS-PAGE but not in size-exclusion chromatography (SEC), i.e. they strongly but non-covalently associated. The activation of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2, however, may follow a heterolytic mechanism in vivo triggered by other secreted bacterial peptidases or host peptidases at the site of infection. Indeed, limited proteolysis of Ba InhA1 E/A mutant with trypsin, chymotrypsin, and thermolysin likewise resulted in pro-peptide removal ( Fig. 2D ).). Importantly, the final mature forms obtained from B. subtilis evinced a well-folded conformation as assessed by circular dichroism, which showed similar spectra and denaturation for both Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 ( Fig. 2E ). Their stability in front of denaturation was further examined by the thermofluor approach, which revealed no dye binding to the former and a temperature of midtransition ( T m ) of 52 °C for the latter ( Fig. 2F ).

## PROTEOLYTIC ACTIVITY AND INHIBITION OF B. ANTHRACIS INHA1/A2
Mature recombinant Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 efficiently digested natural protein substrates including casein, fibrinogen, fibronectin, actin, and gelatin, but not bovine serum albumin or α-lactalbumin, which is a highly stable multi-disulfide protein ( Fig. 3A ). Ba InhA1 further digested β-lactoglobulin and, noteworthy, the major structural component of the mucus, MUC2 mucin, which covers and protects the epithelium of the intestine from bacteria ( Johansson et al., 2013 ). MUC2 mucin was cleaved with a profile similar to that of the human intestinal MP meprin β (compare Fig. 3A , lower right and Fig. 2 in ( Schutte et al., 2014 )). Thus, Ba InhA1 could have a role in the disruption of the dense gel that mucins form permitting anthrax to overcome this gastrointestinal barrier and attack the intestinal epithelium during infection. Ba InhA1 further digested authentic triple-helical collagen at multiple sites like a bona-fide collagenase, thus breaking down a structural protein that may be crucial to all three anthrax infection processes. Ba InhA1 was more active than Ba InhA2 against all protein substrates analyzed. This also held for fluorogenic casein and gelatin, which were cleaved by Ba InhA1 ~5-fold more efficiently than by Ba InhA2 ( Fig. 3C ). Wt Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were also overproduced extracellularly by a B. anthracis strain deficient in six proteases ( Pomerantsev et al., 2011 ), and they showed equivalent activity to that of the proteins expressed in B. subtilis on fluorogenic casein ( Fig. 2C and Fig. S1A, D ). As to peptidolytic activity, Ba InhA1 cleaved peptide Mca-R-P-K-P-V-E-Nva-W-R-K(dnp)-NH 2 with high efficiency and Mca-P-L-A-Nva-Dap(dnp)-A-R-NH 2 less efficiently, whereas Ba InhA2 only digested the former. The rest of peptides tested were not affected with the exception of Abz-V-K-F-Y-D-I-K(dnp), which was digested by Ba InhA1, thus suggesting broad specificity, in particular against peptides. In addition, both B. anthracis proteins displayed maximum proteolytic activity at pH6.5 ( Fig. 3D ), which slightly deviates from previous results with purified Ba InhA1 (pH7–8; ( Chung et al., 2006 )). The MPs were inhibited only by general MP inhibitors—but not by specific inhibitors of other MPs or peptidase classes ( Table S2 )—and by the universal pan-peptidase inhibitor α 2 -macroglobulin ( Fig. 3B ). Accordingly, recombinant Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were competent MPs, which showed overall broad cleavage specificity against proteins and peptides, as also found during autolytic activation (see above) and in natural purified Ba InhA1 protein ( Chung et al., 2006 ). This broad specificity is consistent with the function of Ba InhA1 in the B. anthracis secretome, where it digests not only endogenous toxins (protein antigen, lethal factor and edema factor) and other peptidases (thermolysin Npr599), but also multiple chitinases and chitin binding proteins which enable bacteria to thrive in the soil ( Pflughoeft et al., 2014 ).

## OVERALL STRUCTURE OF B. ANTHRACIS INHA2 ZYMOGEN
A number of constructs and mutants of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were assayed for crystallization but only Ba InhA2 E/A-mutant zymogen (hereafter pro- Ba InhA2-E/A) crystallized adequately for structure analysis. However, given the high sequence identity between the two paralogs (69 %; see Fig. 1B ), the structure-derived findings hereafter may be valid for both. The structure was solved by a two-wavelength MAD experiment with a selenomethionine derivative, and final models were obtained and refined against derivative data to 2.9 Å and native data to 2.6 Å resolution, respectively (see Table 1 ). Overall, structural information is available for two molecules (A and B) from the native crystals and two from the derivative (A and B). Given that molecule A of the native structure is the most complete of the four (see SEP), it is taken as a reference hereafter. This molecule spans the full segment N 50 -R 799 and displays maximal overall dimensions of 70 Å(height) × 85 Å(width) × 65 Å(depth)( Fig. 4A, B ). It consists of four domains: the N-terminal pro-peptide (N 50 —E 133 ), a metzincin-type CD (Q 134 -A 442 ), a VEG domain (K 443 —P 480 +H 644 —R 799 ; for acronym explanation, see below), and a domain previously described in m eprin α and β, A 5 protein, and receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase μ (MAM; G 481 -A 643 ), grafted into VEG (see Fig. 4C ).

## PRO-PEPTIDE AND CATALYTIC DOMAIN OF PRO-BAINHA2-E/A
The polypeptide chain starts on the primed side of the active-site cleft with N 50 , the first of the 85-residue pro-peptide. The chain runs in extended conformation along the cleft in the direction of a true substrate for its first four residues ( Fig. 4D, E ). Thereafter, the chain features a small globular moiety framed by two helices (α1 and α2; see Fig. 1B ). After helix α2, the polypeptide runs across the non-primed side of the cleft and reaches helix α3 at its leftmost end. This helix runs downward along the left molecular surface and reaches the final maturation cleavage point (E 133 -Q 134 ) in the lower back part of the molecule, on top of the VEG domain (see below and Fig. 4D ). This segment, including α3, is flexible and mostly absent (from G 89 -E 95 to P 132 -L 143 ) in the other three molecules of the two structures analyzed. At Q 134 , the chain enters the CD (see Fig. 4A–C ), which with 309 residues is the longest of any metzincin described to date and is sub-divisible into an NTS (Q 134 —G 386 ) and a CTS (L 387 —A 442 ; see Fig. 4C ). The first 22 residues of the NTS creep upwards along the back molecular surface interacting with the VEG domain. At R 162 , the polypeptide enters the first strand (β1) of the metzincin-characteristic five-stranded β-sheet (top to bottom, β4+β5↑—β1↑—β6↑—β9↑—β7↓). Downmost strand β7 is antiparallel to the others and creates the upper rim of the active-site cleft, which has a slightly electronegative character ( Fig. 4E ). In metzincins, a backing helix connects the strands topologically equivalent to β1 and β4+β5. Here, this helix is divided into two (α4 and α5) by a protrusion of the polypeptide featuring a β-ribbon (strands β2 and β3), which contributes to the right back surface. Additional elements decorate the central NTS β-sheet. Among these, an adamalysin helix (α7) nestles on top of the β-sheet and connects β4+β5 with β6. Helix α7 is preceded by a short upstream helix α6 and loop (A 252 —G 265 ), which contributes to a calcium site (“Site 1”) together with Lβ6β7 (G 317 —S 334 ; Fig. 5A ). These two loops constitute a bulge, which protrudes from the molecular surface above the cleft on its primed side. Downstream of helix α7, a long loop (G 281 —H 310 ) includes 3 10 -helix η1 and shapes the left side of the molecule. This loop, hereafter the “calcium-binding loop,” is stabilized by two vicinal calcium cations separated by 10 Å (“Site 2”; see Fig. 5B ), which is reminiscent of the double calcium site found in the pappalysin-family member ulilysin within metzincins ( Tallant et al., 2006 ). Stability provided by calcium was already suggested for B. thuringiensis InhA1 ( Lövgren et al., 1990 ) and was verified here for Ba InhA2 by thermal-shift experiments ( Fig. 2F ). The calcium-binding loop and the adamalysin helix surround loop Lβ7β9, which includes short strand β8—it interacts with the beginning of β9—, on the upper surface of the molecule. After strand β9, the chain enters active-site helix α8, which runs right to left and frames the active-site cleft on its back. Helix α8 contains most of the extended metal-binding motif, which includes zinc-binding residues H 379 and H 383 , and the catalytic glutamate, E 380 , here mutated to alanine (see Fig. 5F ). The NTS-CTS transition is G 386 —L 387 , and the third zinc-binding residue is D 389 from the CTS. Most metzincins have a histidine as third zinc ligand, but aspartates have also been described for snapalysins and igalysins (see ( Cerdà-Costa and Gomis-Rüth, 2014 ) and references therein). Some metzincins like snapalysin and igalysin have a tyrosine two positions downstream of the third ligand, which may play a role in substrate binding and catalysis. It is also present in pro- Ba InhA2-E/A as Y 391 . Overall, the CTS is much smaller than the NTS (56 vs. 253 residues) and also encompasses a Met-turn typical for metzincins—centered on M 408 —and a C-terminal helix (α9), which leads to the end of the CD at A 442 . Similarity searches with Ba InhA2 CD identified the MPs ADAM-17 (PDB 3CKI; ( Maskos et al., 1998 ); Fig. S2A ) and ulilysin (PDB 2CKI; ( Tallant et al., 2006 )) as closest structural relatives, in agreement with their ascription to the metzincins ( Cerdà-Costa and Gomis-Rüth, 2014 ).

## THE VEG DOMAIN OF PRO-BAINHA2-E/A
After leaving the CD, the polypeptide enters an elaborate β domain, which is reminiscent of the principal v iral e nvelope g lycoprotein from dengue virus (PDB 3UC0; ( Cockburn et al., 2012 ); see Fig. S2B ) and is hereafter dubbed “VEG domain” (K 443 —P 480 +H 644 —R 799 ). The VEG domain consists of a central parallel β-sandwich (see Fig. 4A–C ) made up by an upper five-stranded mixed sheet (β10↓—β12↓—β29↑—β30↓—β31+β34↑) and a lower four-stranded antiparallel sheet (β11↑—β39↓—β38↑—β37↓). This central sandwich is decorated with a β-ribbon, perpendicularly grafted after the rightmost strand of the upper sheet and created by β35+β36 with the beginning of strand β37 from the lower sheet. In addition, β35+β36 is interrupted by an insertion that comprises helix α10, a β-ribbon (β32β33) and a calcium site (“Site 3”; see Fig. 5C ). In addition, 3 10 -helix η3 is grafted onto the upper sheet between the second and third strands from the right, and loop Lη3β30 might contribute to shaping the rightmost edge of the active-site cleft. The VEG domain is attached to the bottom of the CTS (see Fig. 4A–C ), mainly through its upper sheet, through an interface spanning 1,610 Å 2 . In addition, VEG contacts the N-terminal segment (see above) and the end of α5 plus the downstream loop of NTS.

## THE MAM DOMAIN OF PRO-BAINHA2-E/A
Grafted between the second and third strands of the upper sheet of VEG ( Fig. 4C ), a second β domain is laterally attached. It displays closest structural similarity with MAM domains, such as the one from the human MP, meprin β (PDB 4QWM; ( Arolas et al., 2012 ); see Fig. S2C ), grafted between two domains. The pro- Ba InhA2-E/A MAM domain is a β-sandwich consisting of two five-stranded antiparallel β-sheets rotated away from each other by ~25° (see Fig. 4A–C ). The sandwich consists of a back twisted sheet (β19—β18—β22—β15+β16—β26) and a front twisted and curled sheet (β20+β21—β17—β23+β24—β25+β14—β27). It is decorated by 3 10 -helix η2 after β21, a calcium site (“Site 4”) embraced by Lβ17β18 and Lβ22β23 (see Fig. 5D ), and a β-ribbon (β13β28) included in the segments in extended conformation connecting the MAM and VEG domains. In addition, a tentative sodium site (“Site 5”) is shaped by Lβ13β14, Lβ23β24 and Lβ25β26 (see Fig. 5E ). While the overall architecture—including the sodium sites—of pro- Ba InhA2-E/A MAM and meprin β MAM are conserved, their respective insertion into the overall multi-domain moieties is circularly permutated and occurs through different regions (see Fig. S2C ).

## FUNCTION OF THE MAM DOMAIN
MAM domains were initially predicted by bioinformatics, and although their function is unknown, they have been found in cell-surface eukaryotic proteins only and may function as interaction or adhesion domains ( Beckmann and Bork, 1993 ). To explore their role in thuringilysins, we designed several MAM-deleted variants of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 (see Table S1 ). Interestingly, all variants were insoluble or not expressed at all in production assays with E. coli and B. subtilis as hosts, respectively. Production in B. anthracis to more closely mimic their natural environment yielded forms that lacked most of the C-terminal VEG domains and were inactive ( Fig. 3C and Fig. S1A–C ). Removal of these C-terminal parts is likely caused by heterolytic cleavage since the B. anthracis strain used for protein expression lacks MPs but not proteases from other catalytic types ( Pomerantsev et al., 2011 ). Overall, these results implicate the MAM domain in folding and/or stability of InhA peptidases, which affects susceptibility to (heterolytic) proteolysis.

## FLEXIBILITY OF THE VEG-MAM LINKAGE
Analysis of molecular flexibility of native and selenomethione-derivatized pro- Ba InhA2-E/A (respective molecules A and B) based on the elastic network model indicated two independent rigid bodies for the pro-peptide+CD+VEG and the MAM moieties separately. P 480 -G 481 and A 643 -H 644 were identified as hinge points, around which rearrangement though rigid-body rotation would occur. Superposition of the four crystallographic molecules based on the respective CD+VEG moieties revealed that MAM domains are rearranged but only maximally for ~15 Å in both the horizontal and the vertical planes (see Fig. 6A ). Maximal displacement in the vertical plane was observed for molecule A of the native structure. This correlated with the segment connecting the globular domain of the pro-peptide with the beginning of the CD being mostly ordered in the final model, in contrast to the other three molecules (see above). The overall flexibility of the VEG-MAM junction was further analyzed in solution by SAXS using Ba InhA1-HE/AA. This was the only full-length protein variant assayed that was stable enough over time—as assessed by SDS-PAGE (see Fig. 2A ) and dynamic light scattering (DLS)—and revealed a homogenous protein solution (polydispersity <15 %). The SAXS experimental curve indicated an essentially globular protein, and best fitting of the experimental data was obtained when the N-terminus of the crystallized protein (E 33 —I 52 ) was modeled as completely flexible (see Fig. 6B ). The fit, however, did not improve significantly when including the relative arrangement between VEG and MAM as found in the four crystal structures. Accordingly, the hinge between these domains accounts for a certain degree of rotational freedom but not complete flexibility.

## ZYMOGENIC AND ACTIVITY DETERMINANTS IN PRO-BAINHA2-E/A
Latency is maintained in pro- Ba InhA2-E/A through the pro-peptide, which wraps around and interacts with the mature enzyme moiety through a large surface of 3,450 Å 2 ( Fig. 4D ). Regions involved include practically the entire pro-peptide and Lα6α7, Lη1β6, Lβ6β7, β7, Lβ7β8, Lα8α9 and α9 of the CD; Lβ14β15 and β22 of the MAM domain; and β36 and the following loop of the VEG domain. The globular moiety of the pro-peptide is attached on the right side of the active-site cleft (see Fig. 4A, C ) and introduces the preceding segment N 50 -Q 53 in the primed side of the cleft, thus mimicking a left-behind cleavage product and blocking substrate access (see Fig. 5F ). The α-amino group of N 50 contacts the catalytic zinc ion by a zinc-NH 2 coordinative bond. With this ligand and the three zinc ligands from the extended metal-binding motif (see above) plus a tentative acetonitrile molecule from the crystallization solution, the metal adopts a trigonal-bipyramidal coordination. The N 50 main chain is further bound through a double interaction with Y 391 Oη, which substantiates a possible role in substrate binding during catalysis as in related MPs (see above). The side chain of N 50 , in turn, points into the S 1 ’ pocket, which is generally a structural element of substrate selectivity in MPs. Here, the pocket is wide and framed by segment G 410 -W 413 from the segment following the Met-turn, by downstream A 418 -G 419 , and by A 373 -H 379 from the active-site helix. The bottom of the cleft is occupied by S 412 , which binds the side-chain Oδ1 atom of N 50 . Overall, the pocket is shaped to accommodate a variety of side chains, which is compatible with its broad specificity (see above). Downstream of N 50 , the main-chain carbonyl of L 51 binds the side-chain Nε1 atoms of W 413 , the amide nitrogen of I 52 binds Y 395 Oη, and the side chain of Q 53 is sandwiched between the W 413 and Y 187 side chains. A second region of intimate contact between the CD and the pro-peptide is provided by segment G 89 -P 98 of the latter. In particular N 93 approaches the metal binding site interacting with R 336 N from cleft upper-rim strand β7 through its Oδ1 atom, and both zinc-ligand D 389 atom Oδ2 and the catalytic metal through its Nδ2 atom (see Fig. 5F ). Downstream pro-peptide residue E 95 is trapped between the side chains of H 258 , H 335 and R 267 . Taken together, this mechanism of latency through the N-terminus of the zymogen is novel for MPs and is reminiscent of the inhibition mechanism of the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) ( Gomis-Rüth et al., 1997 ), and of serralysin inhibitors ( Baumann et al., 1995 ), which are likewise both inhibited by the N-terminal segment of the inhibitors on the primed side of the respective clefts.

## CONCLUSIONS
The present study documents a novel mechanism of latency maintenance in MPs through the N-terminus, which may be shared by other BCG orthologs and paralogs from the thuringilysin family. Sequence analysis of the slightly more distant Vc PrtV ( Fig. S3 ) in the light of the structure of pro- Ba InhA2-E/A ( Fig. S3 ), together with the recently determined NMR structure of its isolated pro-domain ( Edwin et al., 2015 ), point to a very similar general architecture in Vibrio thuringilysins. They possess two additional C-terminal domains in tandem called PKD1 and PKD2, which are believed to participate in protein secretion ( Rompikuntal et al., 2015 ) and should not interfere with the preceding domains (see Fig. S3 ). Accordingly, our conclusions on structure, function, and activation of Ba InhAs may be valid for these relatives, too. InhA and PrtV thuringilysins evince a grafted MAM domain that has a role in proper expression and possibly also in protein function. So far, such domains have been found only in eukaryotes, which suggests that BCG bacteria could have co-opted one through horizontal gene transfer (HGT) during their intimate coexistence with mammalian hosts and integrated it to furnish thuringilysin peptidases. Integration would have occurred under circular permutation of the point of insertion of the MAM domain into preceding/succeeding domains in the respective multi-domain structures. Similar origins through eukaryotic-to-prokaryotic HGT have been postulated for the bacterial MPs fragilysins and karilysin ( Cerdà-Costa et al., 2011 ; Goulas et al., 2011 ).

## ABBREVIATED EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Cloning, expression and purification The sequences of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were amplified from genomic B. anthracis DNA and cloned into vectors pHT43 and pSW4 for extracellular overexpression in B. subtilis WB800N and B. anthracis BH460 cells, respectively (for details on procedures and constructs, see SEP and Table S1 ). Proteins were therefore secreted into the extracellular medium (typically, Luria Bertani), which contained sufficient amounts of zinc and calcium to warrant structural and functional competence of the MPs. E/A and HE/AA mutants of both proteins were prepared using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit and produced as the wt forms. The selenomethionine variant of Ba InhA2-E/A was obtained in the same way, except that cells were grown in minimal medium supplemented with selenomethionine. Proteins produced in B. subtilis and used for structural assays were purified from the culture supernatant by two consecutive steps of immobilized metal-affinity chromatography using first nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid resin and then TALON resin. Proteins were finally polished by SEC in 20 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, and concentrated by ultrafiltration using a 10-kDa cut-off filter device. Autolytic, proteolytic and inhibitory activity Autolytic activation of wt and mutant Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 was monitored over time either directly on culture supernatants or after metal-affinity purification by SDS-PAGE and Edman sequencing. Limited proteolysis reactions of Ba InhA1- and Ba InhA2-E/A mutants were performed using trypsin, chymotrypsin, subtilisin and thermolysin, and subsequently analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Cleavage activity of mature wt Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 was measured against fluorescein conjugates (BODIPY FL casein, DQ gelatin and DQ bovine serum albumin), natural protein substrates (actin, gelatin, collagen type I, mucin, fibronectin, fibrinogen, casein, albumin, α-lactalbumin and β-lactoglobulin), and ten different fluorogenic peptidic substrates. The optimal pH for activity was determined for both mature wt proteins using BODIPY FL casein as substrate in buffer MES for pH 5.0–7.0; HEPES for pH 6.0–8.0; Tris for pH 7.0–9.0; and CAPS for pH 8.0–10, respectively. Inhibition was assessed with a battery of inhibitors of different protease classes, as well as the universal pan-proteinase inhibitor α2-macroglobulin, and BODIPY FL casein as substrate (see SEP and Table S2 ). Conformational stability, DLS and SAXS measurements Mature wt Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were analyzed by the thermal shift approach in the absence and presence of either 2 mM calcium chloride or 2 mM EDTA to determine their temperatures of midtransition. The conformation of both proteins, as well as of MAM-deleted variants, was assessed at 25°C by far-UV CD spectroscopy. Thermal stability of the samples was additionally investigated by heating from 25°C to 95°C over time Ba InhA1-HE/AA was characterized by DLS following standard procedures. SAXS data of this double mutant were collected at 20°C at beam line BM29 (European Synchrotron Radiation Facility [ESRF]) and analyzed following standard procedures. Crystallization and structure determination Native and selenomethionine variants of zymogenic Ba InhA2-E/A were crystallized at4 °C by the hanging-drop vapor diffusion method with 0.1 M BIS-TRIS propane, 0.2 M sodium/potassium tartrate, and 20% (w/v) polyethylene glycol 3,350, pH 7.5, as precipitating-agent solution. Crystals were cryo-protected with 20% (v/v) glycerol, and diffraction datasets were collected at ESRF and ALBA synchrotrons. The crystal structure of the selenomethionine variant was solved by two-wavelength anomalous diffraction using a dataset collected at the absorption peak wavelength of selenium (determined by a previous XANES scan) and a far-energy remote dataset from the same crystal. The structure of native zymogen was solved by likelihood-scored molecular replacement. Details on data collection, processing, structure determination, and refinement are described in SEP and Table 1 .

## CLONING, EXPRESSION AND PURIFICATION
The sequences of Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were amplified from genomic B. anthracis DNA and cloned into vectors pHT43 and pSW4 for extracellular overexpression in B. subtilis WB800N and B. anthracis BH460 cells, respectively (for details on procedures and constructs, see SEP and Table S1 ). Proteins were therefore secreted into the extracellular medium (typically, Luria Bertani), which contained sufficient amounts of zinc and calcium to warrant structural and functional competence of the MPs. E/A and HE/AA mutants of both proteins were prepared using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit and produced as the wt forms. The selenomethionine variant of Ba InhA2-E/A was obtained in the same way, except that cells were grown in minimal medium supplemented with selenomethionine. Proteins produced in B. subtilis and used for structural assays were purified from the culture supernatant by two consecutive steps of immobilized metal-affinity chromatography using first nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid resin and then TALON resin. Proteins were finally polished by SEC in 20 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5, and concentrated by ultrafiltration using a 10-kDa cut-off filter device.

## AUTOLYTIC, PROTEOLYTIC AND INHIBITORY ACTIVITY
Autolytic activation of wt and mutant Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 was monitored over time either directly on culture supernatants or after metal-affinity purification by SDS-PAGE and Edman sequencing. Limited proteolysis reactions of Ba InhA1- and Ba InhA2-E/A mutants were performed using trypsin, chymotrypsin, subtilisin and thermolysin, and subsequently analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Cleavage activity of mature wt Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 was measured against fluorescein conjugates (BODIPY FL casein, DQ gelatin and DQ bovine serum albumin), natural protein substrates (actin, gelatin, collagen type I, mucin, fibronectin, fibrinogen, casein, albumin, α-lactalbumin and β-lactoglobulin), and ten different fluorogenic peptidic substrates. The optimal pH for activity was determined for both mature wt proteins using BODIPY FL casein as substrate in buffer MES for pH 5.0–7.0; HEPES for pH 6.0–8.0; Tris for pH 7.0–9.0; and CAPS for pH 8.0–10, respectively. Inhibition was assessed with a battery of inhibitors of different protease classes, as well as the universal pan-proteinase inhibitor α2-macroglobulin, and BODIPY FL casein as substrate (see SEP and Table S2 ).

## CONFORMATIONAL STABILITY, DLS AND SAXS MEASUREMENTS
Mature wt Ba InhA1 and Ba InhA2 were analyzed by the thermal shift approach in the absence and presence of either 2 mM calcium chloride or 2 mM EDTA to determine their temperatures of midtransition. The conformation of both proteins, as well as of MAM-deleted variants, was assessed at 25°C by far-UV CD spectroscopy. Thermal stability of the samples was additionally investigated by heating from 25°C to 95°C over time Ba InhA1-HE/AA was characterized by DLS following standard procedures. SAXS data of this double mutant were collected at 20°C at beam line BM29 (European Synchrotron Radiation Facility [ESRF]) and analyzed following standard procedures.

## CRYSTALLIZATION AND STRUCTURE DETERMINATION
Native and selenomethionine variants of zymogenic Ba InhA2-E/A were crystallized at4 °C by the hanging-drop vapor diffusion method with 0.1 M BIS-TRIS propane, 0.2 M sodium/potassium tartrate, and 20% (w/v) polyethylene glycol 3,350, pH 7.5, as precipitating-agent solution. Crystals were cryo-protected with 20% (v/v) glycerol, and diffraction datasets were collected at ESRF and ALBA synchrotrons. The crystal structure of the selenomethionine variant was solved by two-wavelength anomalous diffraction using a dataset collected at the absorption peak wavelength of selenium (determined by a previous XANES scan) and a far-energy remote dataset from the same crystal. The structure of native zymogen was solved by likelihood-scored molecular replacement. Details on data collection, processing, structure determination, and refinement are described in SEP and Table 1 .

## SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
supplement
